The Abu Dhabi Autonomous Racing League (A2RL) is an autonomous racing league based in Abu Dhabi and organized by ASPIRE, part of the UAE government's Advanced Technology Research Council. It has three distinct categories: the "car race", the drone race, and the buggy race. The first car race was held on 27 April 2024 at the Yas Marina Circuit, marking the first major autonomous formula race outside the US since the now-folded Roborace championship. The first drone race was held on 11 and 12 April 2025.

Formats
A2RL has three distinct formats, the formula racing format (dubbed the Car Race), the quadcopter drone racing format (dubbed the Drone Race), and the off-road dune buggy racing format (dubbed the Buggy Race).

Car Race
A2RL's main event, the car race is a standard formula racing format with self-driving formula cars. The cars are made by Dallara and are modified versions of Super Formula cars with Yokohama tires. These cars had the CPUs of their AIs  mounted where the driver's seat is on a non-modified chassis, as well as hydraulic actuators for AI control of the vehicle, multiple sensor systems including LIDAR and GPS, and a large LED indicator showing the status of the AI.
The first car race was held on 27 April 2024. This race was marked by the cars' subpar performance: Out of four cars that qualified, only two finished the race - the other two did not. The next race was held on 15 November 2025, with 12 teams.

Technical specifications
The full list of technical specifications are as follows:

Chassis: Dallara EAV24 (modified Dallara SF23)
Forward suspension: Pushrod type, torsion bar spring, adjustable dampers, third element
Rear suspension: Pushrod type, torsion bar, coil springs, adjustable dampers, third element
Tires: Yokohama Advan
Drive-by-wire system: Provided by Meccanica 42, the DBW system consists of steering and brake actuators, with a central ECU that coordinates the driving actions and reacts to any critical situation in real-time.
Brakes: Brembo calipers, Brembo carbon discs, electro-hydraulically activated
Engine: 4 Piston Racing K20C1 (based on Honda 2.0l; turbocharged 4-cylinder engine)
Gearbox: 3MO 6-speed gearbox
Sensor suite: 7x Sony IMX728 cameras, 4x ZF ProWave radar units, 3x Seyond Falcon Kinetic lidar units
Main computer: Neousys RGS-8805GC

Races held
Drone Race
Created in partnership with the Drone Champions' League, the drone race is the quadcopter drone racing aerial format of the A2RL. The first race was held on 11/12 April 2025 at the ADNEC Marina Hall. 10 teams are scheduled to take part.

Buggy Race
The buggy race will be the off-road format of the A2RL using self-driving dune buggies. No date or number of teams has been announced for the first race.

Other events
A2RL is known to host AI vs AI and Human vs AI events, in Abu Dhabi and abroad. One such event took place at the Suzuka Circuit in Japan. The Human vs AI race was precluded due to AI car "Yalla" crashing into the wall during the formation lap.

Team lists