Agility Robotics, Inc. is a privately held American humanoid robotics and engineering company. The company was founded in 2015 as a spin-off from Oregon State University and currently provides automation solutions, based around its humanoid robot Digit.

History
The company was spun out of Oregon State University's Dynamic Robotics Lab in 2015. Jonathan Hurst created the robotics lab at Oregon State and helped establish the scientific basis for dynamic stability and locomotion in bipedal robots. The lab was among the first to reproduce human-like walking dynamics with bipedal robots. That work would be the foundation of Agility Robotics, co-founded by Hurst, Damion Shelton, and Mikhail Jones.
As a part of spinning out from Oregon State, Agility brought with them their first robot, Cassie, a biped with no upper body or perception systems. Cassie was sold as a research platform to labs and innovation departments, starting in 2016, and would go on to set the Guinness World Record for 100M run by a bipedal robot.
In 2017, the company released Digit, a full-size humanoid robot. Digit was equipped with a torso, arms, and a full perception system and was sold to academic labs and research institutes. The company sold a later version of Digit to Ford Motor Company to explore last-mile delivery, an effort that paired Digit with early autonomous vehicles. In 2021, Agility expanded Digit's capabilities to serve the warehouse and logistics industry by focusing on bulk material handling tasks.
The current version of Digit was released in 2023 at ProMat, a material handling and logistics tradeshow. Shortly after, the company announced their first humanoid robotics factory, located in Salem, Oregon, and named RoboFab.
In late 2023 the company announced a partnership with Amazon to bring Digit to their facilities to support distribution and fulfillment tasks. Shortly after that, Agility announced a similar partnership with GXO Logistics to work in their Spanx facility outside Atlanta, GA.
In 2024, Agility and GXO announced the first humanoid Robot-as-a-Service (RaaS) contract between the two companies, expanding the work done by Digit at their Spanx facility.