The AI Safety Summit was an international conference discussing the safety and regulation of artificial intelligence. It was held at Bletchley Park, Milton Keynes, United Kingdom, in November 2023. It was the first ever global summit on artificial intelligence. The conference led to the release of the Bletchley Declaration, which focused on "identifying AI safety risks of shared concern" and "building respective risk-based policies" to "ensure that the benefits of the technology can be harnessed responsibly for good and for all."

Background

The prime minister of the United Kingdom at the time, Rishi Sunak, made AI one of the priorities of his government, announcing that the UK would host a global AI Safety conference in autumn 2023.

Venue

Bletchley Park was a World War II codebreaking facility established by the British government on the site of a Victorian manor and is in the British city of Milton Keynes. It has played an important role in the history of computing, with some of the first modern computers being built at the facility.

Outcomes

28 countries at the summit, including the United States, China, Australia, and the European Union, have issued an agreement known as the Bletchley Declaration, calling for international co-operation to manage the challenges and risks of artificial intelligence.

The Bletchley Declaration affirms that AI should be designed, developed, deployed, and used in a manner that is safe, human-centric, trustworthy and responsible.

Emphasis has been placed on regulating "Frontier AI", a term for the latest and most powerful AI systems. Concerns that have been raised at the summit include the potential use of AI for terrorism, criminal activity, and warfare, as well as existential risk posed to humanity as a whole.The president of the United States, Joe Biden, signed an executive order requiring AI developers to share safety results with the US government. The US government also announced the creation of an American AI Safety Institute, as part of the National Institute of Standards and Technology.

The tech entrepreneur Elon Musk and Sunak did a live interview on AI safety on 2 November on X.

Notable attendees

The following individuals attended the summit:

Rishi Sunak, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom

Kamala Harris, Vice President of the United States

Charles III, King of the United Kingdom (attending virtually)

Elon Musk, CEO of Tesla, owner of X, SpaceX, Neuralink, and xAI

Giorgia Meloni, Prime Minister of Italy

Ursula von der Leyen, President of the European Commission

Sam Altman, CEO of OpenAI

Nick Clegg, former British politician and president of global affairs at Meta Platforms
Mustafa Suleyman, co-founder of DeepMind

Michelle Donelan, UK secretary of state for Science, Innovation and Technology

Věra Jourová, the European Commission’s vice-president for Values and Transparency
Gina Raimondo, United States secretary of commerce

Wu Zhaohui, Chinese vice-minister of science and technology

AI Summits

AI Summits continued in subsequent years, including:

AI Seoul Summit: held in South Korea on 21–22 May 2024.

AI Action Summit: held in France on 10–11 February 2025.

AI Impact Summit: held in India on 19–20 February 2026.
