Anna Makanju (born 1975 or 1976) is a global policy leader and advocate for AI regulation. She has worked in policy affairs for over a decade and has held several government positions at the White House, Department of State, and the Pentagon.

Early life and education

Anna Makanju was born in Russia to a Ukrainian mother and a Nigerian father, she spent a considerable part of her childhood in St. Petersburg. Her father received a Soviet scholarship to study medicine in the former U.S.S.R. While in Russia, Makanju's father met her mother, who was an engineer. Makanju's family later moved between several other countries and states, including Lagos, Nigeria; Germany; Arizona US; and Kuwait, finally settling in Texas US where Makanju completed her high school education.

Makanju attended Western Washington University, where she majored in linguistics and French. After completing her undergraduate degree, Makanju gained experience in the legal field, working with international criminal tribunals in The Hague, the Third Circuit Court of Appeals, and the international arbitration group at Cleary Gottlieb Steen & Hamilton LLP. She then pursued a law degree at Stanford Law School.

Career

Makanju began her career in public service focusing on national security and foreign policy within the Obama Administration. During this period she served as National Security Council Director for Russia. She further contributed to foreign policy serving as a special advisor to then Vice President Joe Biden, specializing in European and Eurasian affairs. Transitioning from government to the private sector, Makanju joined Facebook where she worked on global elections and policy. Her growing interest in the societal impact of artificial intelligence led her to OpenAI. Initially serving as Vice President of Global Affairs, Makanju is shaping the organization's engagement with international bodies. As of September 2024, she holds the position of Vice President of Global Impact, leading efforts to ensure the responsible and ethical development and deployment of AI.

Makanju is an advocate and lobbyist for AI legislation, actively working to address the ethical implications of emerging technologies. Her focus is to ensure AI benefits humanity broadly and equitably, mitigating potential risks and maximizing positive societal impact. She was named to the Inaugural Time100 AI list, which highlights influential women shaping the future of artificial intelligence.
