Artificial intelligence (AI) has a range of uses in government. It can be used to further public policy objectives (in areas such as emergency services, health and welfare), as well as assist the public to interact with the government  (through the use of virtual assistants, for example). According to the Harvard Business Review, "Applications of artificial intelligence to the public sector are broad and growing, with early experiments taking place around the world." Hila Mehr from the Ash Center for Democratic Governance and Innovation at Harvard University notes that AI in government is not new, with postal services using machine methods in the late 1990s to recognise handwriting on envelopes to automatically route letters. The use of AI in government comes with significant benefits, including efficiencies resulting in cost savings (for instance by reducing the number of front office staff), and reducing the opportunities for corruption. However, it also carries risks (described below).

Uses of AI in government
The potential uses of AI in government are wide and varied, with Deloitte considering that "Cognitive technologies could eventually revolutionize every facet of government operations". Mehr suggests that six types of government problems are appropriate for AI applications:

Resource allocation - such as where administrative support is required to complete tasks more quickly.
Large datasets - where these are too large for employees to work efficiently and multiple datasets could be combined to provide greater insights.
Experts shortage - including where basic questions could be answered and niche issues can be learned.
Predictable scenario - historical data makes the situation predictable.
Procedural - repetitive tasks where inputs or outputs have a binary answer.
Diverse data - where data takes a variety of forms (such as visual and linguistic) and needs to be summarised regularly.
Mehr states that "While applications of AI in government work have not kept pace with the rapid expansion of AI in the private sector, the potential use cases in the public sector mirror common applications in the private sector."
Potential and actual uses of AI in government can be divided into three broad categories: those that contribute to public policy objectives; those that assist public interactions with the government; and other uses.

Contributing to public policy objectives
There are a range of examples of where AI can contribute to public policy objectives. These include:

Receiving benefits at job loss, retirement, bereavement and child birth almost immediately, in an automated way (thus without requiring any actions from citizens at all)
Social insurance service provision
Classifying emergency calls based on their urgency (like the system used by the Cincinnati Fire Department in the United States)
Detecting and preventing the spread of diseases
Assisting public servants in making welfare payments and immigration decisions
Adjudicating bail hearings
Triaging health care cases
Monitoring social media for public feedback on policies
Monitoring social media to identify emergency situations
Identifying fraudulent benefits claims
Predicting a crime and recommending optimal police presence
Predicting traffic congestion and car accidents
Anticipating road maintenance requirements
Identifying breaches of health regulations
Providing personalised education to students
Marking exam papers
Assisting with defence and national security (see Artificial intelligence § Military and Applications of artificial intelligence § Other fields in which AI methods are implemented respectively)
Artificial Intelligence in China has been used to drive both political and economic markets. In 2019, Shanghai’s government rolled out 100 billion yuan to assist in funding enterprises that used AI to introduce 22 new policy agendas. Shanghai invested in these enterprises to attract top international talent in order to set up the Shanghai Municipal Big Data Center. City Brain AI is an urban management platform made by Alibaba. China uses City Brain AI to maintain a significant share of capital investment through public and state owned enterprises. The synergy between public and private sectors are more than capital-driven with City Brain AI. The blend of both public and private shareholding is only made out to be through the role of provincial and sub-provincial governments. Both hold control over the direction that City Brain AI makes both socially and economically.

Assisting public interactions with government
AI can be used to assist members of the public to interact with government and access government services, for example by:

Answering questions using virtual assistants or chatbots (see below)
Directing requests to the appropriate area within government
Filling out forms
Assisting with searching documents (e.g. IP Australia's trade mark search)
Scheduling appointments
Various governments, including those of Australia and Estonia, have implemented virtual assistants to aid citizens in navigating services, with applications ranging from tax inquiries to life-event registrations.

Gerrymandering
Gerrymandering is an insidious method of influencing political process. Depending on the objective of its use, the application of artificial intelligence to redraw districts based on voter distribution and demographic datasets can either contribute to impartiality, or sustain partisan gains for interested stakeholders in the election process.

Other uses
Other uses of AI in government include:

Translation
Language interpretation pioneered by the European Commission's Directorate General for Interpretation and Florika Fink-Hooijer.
Drafting documents

Potential benefits
AI offers potential efficiencies and costs savings for the government. For example, Deloitte has estimated that automation could save US Government employees between 96.7 million to 1.2 billion hours a year, resulting in potential savings of between $3.3 billion to $41.1 billion a year. The Harvard Business Review has stated that while this may lead a government to reduce employee numbers, "Governments could instead choose to invest in the quality of its services. They can re-employ workers' time towards more rewarding work that requires lateral thinking, empathy, and creativity — all things at which humans continue to outperform even the most sophisticated AI program."

Risks
Risks associated with the use of AI in government include AI becoming susceptible to bias, a lack of transparency in how an AI application may make decisions, and the accountability for any such decisions.
AI in governance and the economic world might make the market more difficult for companies to keep up with the increases in technology. Large U.S. companies like Apple and Google are able to dominate the market with their latest and most advanced technologies. This gives them an advantage over smaller companies that do not have the means of advancing as far in the digital technology fields with AI.