As of 2025, the artificial intelligence (AI) market in the United Kingdom is worth over £21 billion, and is expected to exceed £1 trillion by 2035. It is the world's third-largest AI market and consistently ranked 3rd in private AI funding between 2013 and 2024, both behind the United States and China. The country ranked third globally in a 2024 report on AI development by Stanford University.

Strategy
The UK government has proposed a plan to boost the country's AI infrastructure and expand its use in public services, with the UK Prime Minister Keir Starmer saying that the country would become one of the "AI superpowers".
The United Kingdom's AI strategy aims to balance safety and innovation; unlike the European Union which adopted the AI Act, the UK is reluctant to legislate early, considering that it may lower the sector's growth, and that laws might be rendered obsolete by technological progress.
In July 2025, the UK government published its UK Compute Roadmap outlining up to £2 billion for a modern public compute ecosystem and a 20-fold expansion of the AI Research Resource by 2030, alongside AI Growth Zones. Also in July, the UK government signed a deal with OpenAI to use its products in public services to increase productivity.
As part of the 2025 Tech Prosperity Deal between the UK and the US, several American companies are investing tens of billions of pounds in British AI infrastructure.

History
The British computer scientist Alan Turing laid the theoretical groundwork for artificial intelligence as a field of research with his 1950 paper, Computing Machinery and Intelligence.
The United Kingdom founded in April 2023 a safety organisation called Frontier AI Taskforce, with an initial budget of £100 million. In November 2023, it evolved into the UK AISI, and continued to be led by Ian Hogarth. The AISI is part of the United Kingdom's Department for Science, Innovation and Technology.
In November 2023, the first global AI Safety Summit was held in Bletchley Park in the UK to discuss the near and far term risks of AI and the possibility of mandatory and voluntary regulatory frameworks.

Companies
The following is a list of UK-based AI companies:

Mind Foundry
Peak
Synthesia
Stability AI
Deepmind
Isomorphic Labs

Researchers