Astera Labs, Inc. is an American fabless semiconductor manufacturer and artificial intelligence company. The company specializes in designing high-speed connectivity solutions for data centers and AI infrastructure. The company has been listed on the Nasdaq since March 2024.

History

Early history

Astera Labs was founded in 2017 in Santa Clara, California, by Jitendra Mohan, Sanjay Gajendra, and Casey Morrison. While working at Texas Instruments Incorporated, the cofounders observed that existing data center connectivity technologies were not keeping pace with advancements in AI and machine learning. The trio quit their jobs to found the startup in Sanjay Gajendra's garage. Their company set out to develop purpose-built connectivity solutions to remove performance bottlenecks in data centers. Astera Labs adopted a fabless semiconductor model, outsourcing manufacturing to partners such as Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company Limited (TSMC).

Funding history

In April 2020, Astera Labs closed its Series B funding with technology investors including Avigdor Willenz, Intel Capital, Ron Jankov, and Sutter Hill Ventures. In September 2021, Astera Labs marked a significant milestone by raising $50 million in Series C funding led by Fidelity Investments. The funding round allowed it to continue focusing on eliminating data bottlenecks in cloud and AI infrastructure. A year later Astera Labs raised a fourth round of funding,and launched two new design centers in Toronto and Vancouver.

In 2023, the media began to report that Astera Labs was considering an IPO the following year. The company finished the year reporting revenue of US$116 million, up from US$80 million the previous year. Official confirmation came in early 2024 that Astera Labs would be listing shares publicly on the NASDAQ in March 2024 under the ticker symbol ALAB.

Funds raised from the IPO began to be invested in expansion from the summer of 2024. One such example was the expansion of operations in Taiwan to further strengthen collaboration with local server ODMs. Astera finished the year by reporting it would be opening a new research and development center in Bengaluru, India at the end of 2024. In June 2025, Astera Labs relocated its headquarters to a larger campus in San Jose, California, tripling its headquarters' size. In late 2025, the company joined the Arm Total Design ecosystem to support chiplet-based AI infrastructure designs.
