Avizo (pronounce: 'a-VEE-zo') is a general-purpose commercial software application for scientific and industrial data visualization and analysis.
Avizo is developed by Thermo Fisher Scientific and was originally designed and developed by the Visualization and Data Analysis Group at Zuse Institute Berlin (ZIB) under the name Amira. Avizo was commercially released in November 2007. For the history of its development, see the Wikipedia article about Amira.

Overview
Avizo is a software application which enables users to perform interactive visualization and computation on 3D data sets.
The Avizo interface is modelled on the visual programming.  Users manipulate data and module components, organized in an interactive graph representation (called Pool), or in a Tree view. Data and modules can be interactively connected together, and controlled with several parameters, creating a visual processing network whose output is displayed in a 3D viewer.
With this interface, complex data can be interactively explored and analyzed by applying a controlled sequence of computation and display processes resulting in a meaningful visual representation and associated derived data.

Application areas
Avizo has been designed to support different types of applications and workflows from 2D and 3D image data processing to simulations.
It is a versatile and customizable visualization tool used in many fields:

Scientific visualization
Materials Research
Tomography,  Microscopy, etc.
Nondestructive testing, Industrial Inspection, and Visual Inspection
Computer-aided Engineering and simulation data post-processing
Porous medium analysis
Civil Engineering
Seismic Exploration, Reservoir Engineering, Microseismic Monitoring, Borehole Imaging
Geology, Digital Rock Physics (DRP), Earth Sciences
Archaeology
Food technology and agricultural science
Physics, Chemistry
Climatology, Oceanography, Environmental Studies
Astrophysics

Features
Data import:

2D and 3D image stack and volume data: from microscopes (electron, optical), X-ray tomography (CT, micro-/nano-CT, synchrotron), neutron tomography and other acquisition devices (MRI, radiography, GPR)
Geometric models (such as point sets, line sets, surfaces, grids)
Numerical simulation data  (such as Computational fluid dynamics or Finite element analysis data)
Molecular data
Time series and animations
Seismic data
Well logs
4D Multivariate Climate Models
2D/3D data visualization:

Volume rendering
Digital Volume Correlation
Visualization of sections, through various slicing and clipping methods
Isosurface rendering
Polygonal meshes
Scalar fields, Vector fields, Tensor representations, Flow visualization (Illuminated Streamlines, Stream Ribbons)
Image processing:

2D/3D Alignment of image slices, Image registration
Image filtering
Mathematical Morphology (erode, dilate, open, close, tophat)
Watershed Transform, Distance Transform
Image segmentation
3D models reconstruction:

Polygonal surface generation from segmented objects
Generation of tetrahedral grids
Surface reconstruction from point clouds
Skeletonization (reconstruction of dendritic, porous or fracture network)
Surface model simplification
Quantification and analysis:

Measurements and statistics
Analysis spreadsheet and charting
Material properties computation, based on 3D images:

Absolute permeability
Thermal conductivity
Molecular diffusivity
Electrical resistivity/formation factor
3D image-based meshing for CFD and FEA:

From 3D imaging modalities (CT, micro-CT, MRI, etc.)
Surface and volume meshes generation
Export to FEA and CFD solvers for simulation
Post-processing for simulation analysis
Presentation, automation:

MovieMaker, Multiscreen, Video wall, collaboration, and VR support
TCL Scripting, C++ extension API
Avizo is based on Open Inventor 3D graphics toolkits (FEI Visualization Sciences Group).