Bade Miyan Chote Miyan (transl. Big Mister and Little Mister) is a 2024 Indian Hindi-language science fiction action film directed by Ali Abbas Zafar and produced by Pooja Entertainment and AAZ Films. Sharing its name with the 1998 film also produced by Pooja Entertainment, the film stars Akshay Kumar, Tiger Shroff and Prithviraj Sukumaran in the lead roles alongside Manushi Chhillar, Alaya F, Sonakshi Sinha and Ronit Roy. The story follows two former soldiers in a race against time to save India from an imminent attack by a vengeful scientist.
The film was announced in February 2022. Principal photography began in January 2023 and ended by February 2024 with filming held in Mumbai, Scotland, London, Luton, Abu Dhabi, and Jordan. The soundtrack and musical score were respectively composed by Vishal Mishra and Julius Packiam, while the cinematography and editing were handled by Marcin Laskawiec and Steven H. Bernard. With a budget of ₹350 crore (US$41 million), it is one of the most expensive Indian films ever made.
Bade Miyan Chote Miyan was theatrically released on 11 April 2024, coinciding with Eid al-Fitr. The film received generally negative reviews from critics, and emerged as a box-office bomb.

Plot
A masked perpetrator attacks an Indian convoy, containing a weapon, and tells the Indian Army that they will have to race-against-time to prevent the destruction of India. Captain Misha faces off against a masked attacker in Shanghai, where she impales him, but the attacker's wounds inexplicably heal instantly and he escapes. Misha reports the incident to Col. Azad, who instructs her to enlist court-martialed soldiers Firoz "Freddy" and Rakesh "Rocky" for the mission. Only Rocky agrees to help.
Misha and Rocky arrive in London and meet Parminder Pam, an IT specialist assigned to assist them. In London, Azad gets shot by the masked perpetrator. The team infiltrates the London tube to retrieve the stolen package. Freddy arrives to help them fight the masked men. Pam unlocks the vault, revealing that the package is actually Captain Priya Dixit, Freddy's ex-girlfriend. Since the hard drives were at risk of being hacked, the codes to Karan Kavach, a highly advanced defence system, were encrypted inside Priya's brain. The masked perpetrator and his army take Priya hostage and the perpetrator reveals himself as Kabir, a scientist and Freddy and Rocky's former friend.
In the past, Kabir intends to help the Indian Army with his latest invention: a cloning program where clones based on Freddy and Rocky's DNA could be programmed with orders and win wars without being killed. When Kabir reveals his intentions to conquer the world using this invention, Azad orders him to shut it down since it would be unethical. Kabir switches sides and sells the invention to India's enemies. Priya reveals this information to Azad, where Freddy and Rocky are given orders to capture Kabir alive, but they end up killing Kabir and are court-martialed for not following orders, after which Freddy breaks up with Priya without giving her any reason.
In the present, Kabir reveals that he survived because the person who died at the hands of Rocky and Freddy, was actually his clone Eklavya. Eklavya's death left him vengeful as he loved the clone like a son. The masked men were actually Freddy and Rocky's clones. Kabir reveals that he has also cloned Azad and killed the real one.
Kabir kidnaps Priya and leaves Freddy and Rocky to die, but they kill Kabir's henchmen and reveal to the team that Kabir plans to turn Pakistan and China against India by deactivating the Karan Kavach and launching airstrikes against the two countries, which would cause India's reputation to be globally tarnished.
Freddy, Rocky, Misha and Pam infiltrate Kabir's base, where Kabir decrypts the password from Priya's brain. Freddy and Rocky eventually face off against their own clones, who keep rejuvenating due to an internal power source. The duo kills the clones by luring them into a power grid, causing them to explode. Kabir launches the airstrikes before Freddy and Rocky kill him. Priya reveals that Eklavya is the password. The Karan Kavach is reactivated, averting the airstrike and a potential war.
In a post-credits scene, the team leaves the base, while Kabir survives, hinting at a sequel.

Cast
Production
Development
In December 2021, Akshay Kumar and Tiger Shroff were signed for Ali Abbas Zafar's next action film under Pooja Entertainment, which also backed the 1998 film of the same name. Eventually, the film was announced on 8 February 2022. Zafar, apart from being the writer and director, also co-produced it under his own banner, AAZ Films.

Casting
Manushi Chhillar was signed to play an action-packed role, reuniting with Kumar after Samrat Prithviraj (2022). In December 2022, Prithviraj Sukumaran was roped in to play the main antagonist named Kabir. Sonakshi Sinha was cast in March 2023. Prior to that, Alaya F and Ronit Roy joined the film in January 2023.

Filming
Principal photography began on 17 January 2023 at Yash Raj Studios in Mumbai. The first schedule included an action scene shot in a set of Bunker before it moved to Film City where other action scenes were shot. On 19 February 2023, Zafar confirmed the first schedule wrap.
On 28 February 2023, the second schedule took place in the United Kingdom in which a major chunk of the film was shot in Scotland, London and Luton before it ended on 12 April 2023. Some high-octane action sequences were filmed featuring cars, bikes, helicopters and tanks.  An action scene was shot at night in Paisley where a street was recreated as Shanghai. Kumar also got injured while shooting a bike chase sequence.
On 16 April 2023, last schedule began in Abu Dhabi with the shooting of few portions of the title track at Emirates Palace. Action scenes featuring Cars, Bikes, Tanks, Horses, Dune Buggies, Plane, and Chinook helicopter were shot. A set of Indian Army Airstrip was recreated at Liwa Dessert. Filming wrapped on 9 May 2023 except patchwork.
On 21 January 2024, the filming for four final songs choreographed by Bosco-Caesar kicked off in Jordan with Kumar, and Shroff which took place for 12 days. Firstly the title track was shot at Roman Theatre and other locations of Jerash. Filming then moved to the Dead Sea where a romantic track with Kumar, Shroff, Sinha, Chhillar and Alaya F and a party track which also includes Prithviraj and Roy were shot. Last song shoot took place at Wadi Rum where an Arabic style song was shot. On 1 February 2024, Kumar confirmed the schedule wrap.

Post-production
The VFX work of the film is done by DNEG.

Music
The music of the film is composed by Vishal Mishra and lyrics are written by Irshad Kamil while the background score is composed by Julius Packiam. The first single titled "Bade Miyan Chote Miyan (Title Track)" was released on 19 February 2024. The second single titled "Mast Malang Jhoom" was released on 28 February 2024. The third single titled "Wallah Habibi" was released on 13 March 2024. The title track to the 1998 original, sung by Udit Narayan and Sudesh Bhosale, was recreated and used during a scene in the film.

Marketing
On 26 February 2024, a promotional event for the film was held in Lucknow, where Akshay Kumar and Tiger Shroff performed live stunts and interacted with the crowd. The film was promoted at India Today Conclave 2024 in Delhi. On 22 March 2024, Akshay Kumar and Tiger Shroff performed live at the 2024 Indian Premier League opening ceremony. The trailer of the film was launched at an event in Mumbai on 26 March 2024.

Release
Theatrical
In February 2022, the release date of the film was announced as 22 December 2023 (in the week of Christmas). However, in May 2023, a new release date of Eid 2024 was announced by Pooja Entertainment.
The film was released on 11 April in standard formats, 3D, and IMAX  in Hindi alongside dubbed versions in Tamil, Telugu, Malayalam and Kannada languages.

Distribution
PVR Inox Pictures acquired the theatrical rights for India and Yash Raj Films for overseas.

Home media
The digital streaming rights were acquired by Netflix. The film began streaming on Netflix from 6 June 2024.

Reception
Critical response
Bade Miyan Chote Miyan received generally negative reviews from critics. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 17% of 12 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 3.3/10.
Ronsk Kotecha of The Times of India gave 3.5/5 stars and wrote "Bade Miyan Chote Miyan goes out all guns blazing to make for an entertaining potboiler with heart-pounding action, cheeky humour and barely a dull moment." Titas Chowdhury of News18 gave 3/5 stars and wrote "Akshay Kumar and Tiger Shroff's fun banters are pure gold. Prithviraj Sukumaran's evil act keeps you on the edge."
Bollywood Hungama gave 2.5/5 stars and wrote "BMCM suffers due to a weak script and poor dialogues, however, it is a decent watch for the fans of Akshay Kumar, Tiger Shroff, and those who patronize action movies." Pratikshya Mishra of The Quint gave 2/5 stars and wrote "Bade Miyan Chote Miyan doesn't, however, rely on portraying its heroes with the same ol’ hypermasculinity – these heroes like to have fun instead.
Zinia Bandyopadhyay of India Today gave 1.5/5 stars and wrote "Ali Abbas Zafar is an OG director when it comes to action. However, here it turns out to be a disappointment." Saibal Chatterjee of NDTV gave 1/5 stars and wrote "Bade Miyan Chote Miyan offers not a single shred that could considered a saving grace. The story is astonishingly hollow."
Anuj Kumar of The Hindu wrote "Writer-director Ali Abbas Zafar's attempt to give the soul of Bollywood tropes an AI finish appeals in parts." Monika Rawal Kukreja of Hindustan Times wrote "For those with a penchant for action films, good, bad or ugly, BMCM will definitely make for a one-time watch."

Accolades