"BBL Drizzy" (released as the file name "BBL DRIZZY BPM 150.mp3") is a "diss track beat" by American record producer Metro Boomin. It was released on May 5, 2024, in response to the Drake–Kendrick Lamar feud which consisted of multiple diss tracks from both sides. "BBL Drizzy" samples an artificial intelligence-generated track, released on April 14, of the same name by comedian King Willonius. It is the first notable example of AI sampling in mainstream hip-hop music, according to Billboard.
Metro announced he would offer a free beat and a $10,000 cash prize to whoever delivered the best rap over the backing track in an effort to deride Canadian rapper Drake. The song's title derives from rapper Rick Ross ironizing about a rumor that Drake received plastic surgery on his abs and on his nose, using the slang term "BBL", which is an acronym for Brazilian butt lift.
"BBL Drizzy" quickly went viral, generating more than 3.4 million streams on SoundCloud within a week.

Background
The Drake–Kendrick Lamar feud is a rap feud between American artist Kendrick Lamar and Canadian artist Drake which escalated in early 2024. Metro Boomin became closely involved in the feud after he, Lamar and Future released the song "Like That" in March 2024 which further escalated the conflict. In April 2024, Drake would release the song "Push Ups", in which he directly dismisses Metro's involvement in the feud with the line "Metro shut your hoe ass up and make some drums". In the song "Family Matters", Drake further antagonizes Metro, directly calling him out in the song once again.
Rick Ross coined the phrase BBL Drizzy, ironizing about a rumor that Drake received plastic surgery on his abs and on his nose, using the slang term "BBL", which is an acronym to Brazilian butt lift. Drake referred to Ross's involvement in the feud in the song "Push Ups" also, rapping: "Can't believe he jumpin' in, this nigga turnin' 50 / Every song that made it on the chart, he got from Drizzy / Spend that lil' check you got and stay up out my business". Ross responded with his diss "Champagne Moments", coining the phrase BBL Drizzy on X (formerly known as Twitter) and Instagram while promoting the song. Inspired by an X post from Rick Ross, comedic performer Willonius Hatcher, who goes by King Willonius online, released an AI generated R&B parody song titled "BBL Drizzy". The song was created using Udio, a generative artificial intelligence model that produces music. Hatcher stated that he initially experimented with different music genres including country, Afrobeats and yacht rock before settling on R&B.

Release
On May 5, 2024, Metro responded to Drake's diss on "Family Matters" on X and released an instrumental titled "BBL DRIZZY 150 BPM.mp3" on SoundCloud, sampling "BBL Drizzy", a comedic R&B song by King Willonius. Unbeknownst to Metro at the time, the original track's vocals and instrumental were generated entirely by an artificial intelligence model. In addition to the release of the beat, Metro also announced that he would hold a contest on social media for whoever could produce the best freestyle rap over the beat, with the winner receiving a beat from him for free. Users on social media platforms including TikTok, Instagram and X were quick to react, releasing their own takes on the track shortly after. On May 6, Metro announced that he would also give the winner a $10,000 prize, and a runner-up would also receive a beat. Within a week, the song had received more than 3.3 million streams on SoundCloud and maintained the number one spot on the platform's "New and Hot" chart. Metro has yet to pick a winner for the contest.

Reception
Upon release, the track immediately received widespread attention on social media platforms. Notable celebrities and internet personalities including Elon Musk and Dr. Miami reacted to the beat. Several corporations also responded, including educational technology company Duolingo and meat producer Oscar Mayer.
In addition to users releasing freestyle raps over the instrumental, the track also evolved into a viral phenomenon where users would create remixes of the song beyond the hip hop genre. Many recreated the song in other genres, including house, merengue and Bollywood. Users also created covers of the song on a variety of musical instruments, including on saxophone, guitar and harp.

Use of artificial intelligence
"BBL Drizzy" prompted widespread discussion regarding the use of generative artificial intelligence to create art and music. It is the first notable example of an AI generated song being used as a sample in commercial music production. The acceptance of the song by the general public despite controversies surrounding AI art has prompted discussion regarding potential ramifications of a growth in commercial music utilizing AI.

Aftermath
Immediately following the release of "BBL Drizzy", Drake responded in an Instagram comment, asking if Metro had really "cheffed a beat about [his] ass". Later, on May 24, he was included on rapper Sexyy Red's mixtape, In Sexyy We Trust. On this project, Drake would rap over the "BBL Drizzy" instrumental on the song "U My Everything".
A copyright infringement lawsuit was filed against Udio, the AI startup used to create the diss track, by the Recording Industry Association of America in June 2024 following the viral success of the original track.

Charts