Blade Runner 2099 is an upcoming American sci-fi television miniseries created by Silka Luisa for Amazon Prime Video. It is an installment in the Blade Runner franchise, serving as a sequel to the films Blade Runner (1982) and Blade Runner 2049 (2017). The franchise is based on Philip K. Dick's 1968 novel Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?.
Blade Runner 2099 is scheduled to premiere in 2026.

Cast and characters
Main
Guest
Production
Development
In November 2021, Ridley Scott announced that a pilot for a Blade Runner television spin-off had been written along with a series bible and initial plans for 10 episodes. In February 2022, the series title Blade Runner 2099 was revealed, and it was being developed for Amazon Prime Video. Silka Luisa was writing and executive producing the show, with additional writers to be brought in. Scott was considered directing in the development phase. Amazon ordered it as a miniseries in September 2022, and Tom Spezialy joined as a writing executive producer. In March 2023, Jeremy Podeswa was hired to executive produce and direct the pilot episode. In February 2024, he exited the project due to scheduling conflicts, and Jonathan Van Tulleken took on the role of directing the first two episodes. Ariel Kleiman, Marcela Said, and Karena Evans were also hired to direct episodes of the series.

Casting
In May 2024, Michelle Yeoh joined the cast as Olwen. In June, Hunter Schafer joined the cast as the co-lead of the series. In July, Dimitri Abold, Lewis Gribben, Katelyn Rose Downey, Daniel Rigby, Johnny Harris, Amy Lennox, Sheila Atim, and Matthew Needham joined the cast of the series. In August, Tom Burke and Maurizio Lombardi joined the cast as series regulars.

Filming
The series was getting ready to begin shooting in Belfast, when the production was postponed to 2024 due to the 2023 WGA strike. After the strike was over, the production ended up leaving Northern Ireland entirely. Roughly £1.5 million had been spent of £4.1 million awarded by the Northern Ireland Screen fund, but all money would be returned to the NI Screen fund upon the production's exit from the country. This did leave "a gap in Northern Ireland's production schedule" according to NI Screen fund's chief executive Richard Williams.
Production began in early May 2024, in Prague, Czech Republic, and filming began there in June, with Rob Hardy, Ula Pontikos, Vanja Černjul, and Damián García serving as cinematographers. Filming wrapped in late December 2024.

Post-production
Fiona Colbeck, Leo Trombetta, and Henk Van Eeghen are editors for the series.

Release
Blade Runner 2099 is scheduled to premiere on Amazon Prime Video in 2026.