Bully is the upcoming twelfth studio album by the American rapper Kanye West. West announced it in September 2024 and released multiple work-in-progress versions, with different tracklists, via X in March 2025. These versions feature guest appearances from Peso Pluma, Playboi Carti, and Ty Dolla Sign. Five tracks were released as singles through two EPs, released in June 2025. The album has been delayed several times, and is currently scheduled for release on March 20, 2026, via YZY and Gamma.
Bully was originally released as a short film, Bully V1, directed by West and edited by Hype Williams. It stars West's son, Saint, who fights New Japan Pro-Wrestling wrestlers with a toy mallet. Sonically, the album resembles West's work on 808s & Heartbreak (2008) and My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy (2010). It extensively relies on sampling and interpolation, and West mostly sings instead of rapping. Most of West's vocals in the original releases are artificial intelligence-generated audio deepfakes, although he intended to re-record the lyrics with his own vocals; most songs present on the two promotional EPs contain deepfaked vocals. With the supposed release date of March 20, 2026, West has apparently removed all deepfaked vocals.
Bully was recorded as West became the subject of controversy for promoting hate speech, including making antisemitic statements, endorsing Nazism, and insulting family and associates, on his X account. West released multiple versions on X on March 18 with no prior announcement, asserting it remained a work in progress. Bully V1 received mostly positive reviews from music critics, with particular praise for its production style, though a few found its presentation lackluster.

Background
According to producer Mike Dean, Kanye West began working on the Bully song "Beauty and the Beast" during the sessions for his album Donda (2021). West offered the song "Preacher Man" to Drake, who declined, before incorporating it into Bully. In 2024, West collaborated with the American singer Ty Dolla Sign to release the collaborative albums Vultures 1 and Vultures 2 as ¥$. Vultures 1 received mixed reviews, while Vultures 2 was panned for being released in an unfinished state and its alleged use of artificial intelligence (AI). Producer Erick Sermon said that West had been working on a solo album, Y3, before putting it aside to work on Vultures. Sermon said that he had contributed to Y3 in 2023. West denied Sermon's story, messaging a fan account to state that there was no album in development with the name.

Recording
Following the Vultures releases, record producer Digital Nas shared text messages from West indicating his intention to go into "full art studio mode". On September 26, 2024, West posted a video on Instagram showing himself using an ASR-10 keyboard to create "Preacher Man", which had been previewed at listening events. During his performance at the Wuyuan River Stadium in Haikou, China after the release of Vultures 2 on September 28, West announced Bully, previewing "Beauty and the Beast" and "Preacher Man". He posted several previews on Instagram and his website over the next few days. American music journalist Touré reported that Bully would be a concept album inspired by West's solitude living in Tokyo, with West as its sole producer:"Traditionally, [West] is the product of a team—there are producers [and] writers helping him; he comes with the big ideas but there's others involved. [West] is gonna make [Bully] pretty much by himself. A fresh chapter in his life because in Tokyo he can be who he wants to be."Though Touré claimed that West worked on Bully by himself and effectively lived in isolation, West invited former collaborators Don Toliver and Baby Keem to Tokyo the same month as his report, and mentioned on a April 2025 livestream with Digital Nas that the album featured co-writing from Quentin Miller, Ty Dolla Sign, Toliver, Malik Yusef, and Billy Walsh. According to Rolling Stone, they were able to confirm that Bully had finished recording before West's Wall Street Journal apology for antisemitic statements in January 2026.

Promotion
On October 25, 2024, West made Bully available for pre-order on his website YEEZY.com in vinyl and CD formats, alongside a Bully themed merch collection. He previewed new songs while DJing at the 1 Oak club in Tokyo on January 19, 2025, with two being remixes of Future's "Lil Demon" and "Magic Don Juan" and another being an untitled track. After appearing with his wife Bianca Censori at the 67th Annual Grammy Awards on February 3, West played more songs at the event's after party, including one with a chorus from his daughter North.
In a February 2025 interview with Justin LaBoy, West said Bully would feature AI vocals. To demonstrate its capabilities, he ran Lil RT's debut single "60 Miles" through a voice model meant to mimic himself, which Lil RT's mother approved of despite never being informed that West would use her son's vocals. West's choice to use AI was criticized, which he responded to by comparing it to Auto-Tune, a technology that faced similar backlash before becoming widely accepted in music. He said Bully was scheduled for release on June 15, coinciding with North's birthday. On February 9, he released "Beauty and the Beast" on his website. On March 20, West said that "Melrose", a song featuring Playboi Carti and Ty Dolla Sign from the preview tracklist, would not be on the album. He replied to a fan that he would turn it into a solo song. West's decision to cut "Melrose" likely stems from his anger over not being featured on Carti's third studio album, Music.
West held a concert at Shanghai, China on July 12 in support of Bully, performing the previously released singles alongside older songs from his discography. On January 3, 2026, the Yeezy website was updated with preorder options for the album including multi-colored vinyl, CD, cassette, and bundles; the cassette and CD images contained the track listing.. Later that month, it was reported he was planning to hold a concert in Mexico City, Mexico for the first time in nearly 20 years. In that concert he played the previously released singles "Preacher Man", "Beauty and the Beast", and "Last Breath", and premiered "All the Love" for the first time.

Synopsis
Bully V1 is accompanied by a black-and-white short film of the same name, directed by West and edited by Hype Williams. It stars West's son Saint, who stands in a wrestling ring wielding a toy mallet and fends off aggressors portrayed by Japanese professional wrestlers Yoh, Toru Yano, Tiger Mask, and El Desperado. The album plays over the footage, the first cut of which lasts for 29 minutes; a later cut runs for 45 minutes. According to Rolling Stone's Jayson Buford, Saint represents West, "who envisions himself as a martyr being attacked by all sides". However, the film's tone is ridiculous and comedic, with GQ's Paul Thompson writing that the visuals feature "a playfulness [and] generosity" reflected in the music.

Songs
Bully V1 contains nine or ten songs, depending on the version. The track listing differs across the versions as well. Bully V1 opens with "Preacher Man", a minimalist track in which West raps about celebrity. The fourth track on the "post Hype version", "Circles", features "a patient, lively beat" flipped from French band Cortex's song "Huit Octobre 1971" (1975). The title track, "Bully", features West using heavy Auto-Tune, which Buford compared to his performance on 808s & Heartbreak (2008).
Other tracks include "Highs and Lows" and "Last Breath", the latter of which features Mexican singer Peso Pluma. "Melrose", featuring West's frequent collaborators Playboi Carti and Ty Dolla Sign, is the tenth and final track on the version West released on X, but is absent from the YouTube upload.

Musical style
Billboard's Gil Kaufman wrote that sonically, Bully resembles West's "most experimental, creatively lauded period" from the late 2000s, specifically 808s & Heartbreak (2008) and My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy (2010). Kaufman described the songs as "spare, soul-flecked compositions", featuring West crooning with vocals processed through Auto-Tune. West mostly sings instead of rapping, and according to him, half of his vocals are AI-generated deepfakes. Thompson wrote that West's use of AI is not immediately obvious, since "[his] vocals for the most part function as texture rather than the songs' engine". He said it becomes clear about halfway through the album due to the vocals' resemblance to those in 808s & Heartbreak.

Along with the vocals, Bully also employs AI software in its production. In his February 2025 interview with Justin Laboy, West championed the benefits of AI stem separation, stating, "right now, you can take any song and separate it; just get the vocals, just get the bassline, the drums; and completely separate it. So when I send a song or a sample to my engineers, I just say, '[John Scott], AI.'" West had previously used AI separation technology on his collaboration with Kano Computing, the Stem Player.
As with West's early work, Bully relies heavily on sampling. Recordings such as "A Change Is Gonna Come" (1964) by Sam Cooke, "You Can't Hurry Love" (1966) by the Supremes, "(They Long to Be) Close to You" (1970) by Burt Bacharach and Hal David, "Huit Octobre 1971" (1975) by Cortex, "Bésame Mamá" (1996) by Poncho Sanchez, and "Soleil Soleil" (2020) by Pomme are sampled or interpolated. One track, "Losing Your Mind", features an artificial intelligence deepfake cover of the Can song "Vitamin C" (1972), while "Bully" samples the Simpsons character Nelson Muntz's "ha ha!" catchphrase. MusicTech and Variety noted that many of these appeared to be uncleared. Pomme had previously denied West permission to sample "Soleil Soleil", citing disagreements with his political views.

Releases
Bully V1
West initially announced a release date of June 15, 2025, coinciding with the 12th birthday of his daughter, North West. Three early versions of the record were surprise released, each with different track listings, on March 18, 2025, via his X account. They were hosted through the website Frame.io. West stated the album was a work in progress and expressed regret for using AI, saying he had grown to hate it. West intends to work on the album further, as well as re-record the lyrics with his own vocals, adding that he may not release it on digital streaming platforms because of his belief that "streams are fake and the French and Jewish record labels treat artists like prostitutes".
West released Bully V1 amidst controversy arising from his hate speech during X rants, in which he made antisemitic remarks, defended Sean Combs, and insulted his ex-wife Kim Kardashian; his former associate Jay-Z, his wife Beyoncé, and their children; and fellow rappers such as Playboi Carti, Tyler, the Creator, and Future.
West released a "screening version", a "post Hype version", and a "post post [sic] Hype version". On March 22, West published the screening version, dated December 2024, on YouTube. Media publications noted tracklist differences across the versions. The screening version does not feature "Melrose", which is the last song on others. The YouTube and Apple Music releases were taken down shortly after being uploaded without explanation.

Full release
Despite the March video release, West reaffirmed during a recorded meeting with streamer Sneako on May 24, 2025, that Bully would receive a full release on June 15, 2025. West acknowledged his original October 25 pre-order for the album, saying that "We sold vinyl, though. We just haven't made them yet. That shit is like, 30,000 units or something like that." He spent much of the meeting discussing how artists are exploited by the music industry, encouraging them to fight back. The album ultimately missed the original release date.
On June 16, five tracks intended to feature on Bully were uploaded to the ISRC website under the artist names "Ye" and "Kanye West", being the songs "Highs and Lows", "Beauty and the Beast", "Preacher Man", "Damn", and "White Lines". Afterwards, West allegedly told the fan account YeFanatics that he planned to release the album in sets of five songs. The DMs posted by the account implied that five songs would be released on the 16th, and another five on the 17th. On June 20, West released "Preacher Man", "Beauty and the Beast", and "Damn" to streaming platforms as a 3-track Bully EP. On June 27, West briefly uploaded a second EP to YouTube and Tidal, containing the tracks "Last Breath" and "Losing Your Mind", which was taken down a few hours later.
On July 2, Bully was made available to pre-save on the "Ye" and "Kanye West" Spotify profiles, with a tracklist of 13 songs, to be released on July 25. The next day, the second Bully EP was re-released with updated production. On July 18, Bully was delayed to be released on September 26, 2025, The album was once again delayed on September 22, being rescheduled to November 7, 2025.  On November 3, West once again delayed the release to December 12. However, one day later, the album's Spotify page was reverted to the original release date, and later that day, changed once again to the release date of December 12. Once again on December 8, West delayed the release to January 30, 2026. On January 3, the Yeezy website was updated with preorder options including multi-colored vinyl, CD, cassette, and bundles. On January 28, West delayed the release to March 20, 2026, coinciding with a deal with the American media company Gamma to distribute the album.

Artwork and title
On October 23, 2024, West posted Bully's cover, shot by the Japanese photographer Daidō Moriyama, on Instagram. It features a black-and-white image of his son Saint West wearing titanium grills, similar to those West wore from January 2024 to around November 2025. West said the title Bully was a reference to Saint, who he observed kicking a kid for being "weak".

Speaking on the photoshoot process, grills designer Omar Alvarado said: The intensity of this project was unforgettable. Nearly everything that could go wrong did, which made the manufacturing process a real test of skill and resilience. But seeing the team and I overcome every obstacle to deliver was an amazing feeling.
On March 16, 2025, West tweeted an image of a red Nazi swastika against a black background and claimed it was his newest album's cover art. Several sources reported that this was the cover for Bully. He also tweeted the Schutzstaffel insignia, both in white and red variants, and claimed it was the new Sunday Service Choir logo. He quickly deleted the tweets, and the YouTube upload featured West's son on the cover.

Critical reception
Bully V1 received overall positive reviews from music critics. Billboard's Michael Saponara found that those willing to overlook West's behavior enjoyed Bully and praised it as evocative of his 2000s work, such as 808s & Heartbreak. Thompson wrote that it brought him "no pleasure to report that Kanye West made a good Kanye West album", describing Bully as "not only the best collection of beats he's assembled in more than a decade, but a rich, warm, even optimistic record that feels safely cloistered from the internet, the world, even its primary author." Thompson favorably compared its production to West's singles "Only One" (2014) and "FourFiveSeconds" (2015). Frazier Tharpe of GQ commented on the "admittedly very good production" while discussing the rumored 2025 Jay-Z album. The Breakfast Club's Nyla Symone said she liked the Bully songs she had listened to, adding that while she doubted West could make a comeback, "as far as being excellent at his craft, he's never swayed from that."
Jayson Buford of Rolling Stone described Bully as West's best album since The Life of Pablo (2016), "show[ing] glimmers of the artist he once was." He felt it indicated that West was still capable of quality work, but also found it his first boring album and not good enough to restore his reputation. In particular, he found the track "Bully" to suffer from "nonsensical" lyricism. Billboard's Kyle Dennis criticized Bully's curation and sequencing, saying of West's albums, "I haven't had a favorable listening experience top-to-bottom in quite some time."

Track listing
All tracks are produced by Ye, except where noted.