The Amazing Digital Circus is an Australian adult independent animated web series created, written, and directed by Gooseworx and produced by Glitch Productions. The series follows a group of humans trapped inside a circus-themed virtual reality game, where they are overseen by an erratic artificial intelligence while coping with personal traumas and psychological tendencies. Gooseworx pitched the series to Glitch, inspired by the primitive computer-generated imagery of the 1990s, as well as the short story "I Have No Mouth, and I Must Scream" by American writer Harlan Ellison.

The series began production in 2022, with its pilot episode premiering on Glitch Productions' YouTube channel on 13 October 2023. The pilot went viral, becoming one of the most-viewed animation pilots on the platform; it was praised by critics for its animation, writing, voice acting, and dark themes, and was nominated for an Annie Award. The full series entered production following the pilot's popularity. On 4 October 2024, following the release of the third episode, the series became available on Netflix.

Synopsis

The Amazing Digital Circus follows a cast of six humans—Pomni, Jax, Ragatha, Gangle, Kinger, and Zooble—who have become trapped in the titular circus, a cartoonish virtual reality game. Under the direction of the circus's ringmaster, an artificial intelligence named Caine, they engage in nonsensical adventures to distract themselves from their situation, all while at risk of losing their sanity and "abstracting" into digital monstrosities.

Characters

Main

Pomni (voiced by Lizzie Freeman), a nervous but compassionate 25-year old woman who is the most recent human to be trapped in the circus. Originally an accountant, she unwittingly enters the circus while recording online videos of exploring abandoned buildings to escape the boredom of her job. Her in-game avatar is a cartoon jester.

Caine (voiced by Alex Rochon), the circus' well-meaning yet unstable AI ringmaster with a set of teeth for a head. He organises daily adventures to keep the humans entertained, which results in unintended psychological torment. The character is based on AM from Harlan Ellison's short story "I Have No Mouth, and I Must Scream", with the difference—according to Gooseworx—that "instead of AM being a living embodiment of hate, he's a fun-loving wacky little guy."

Jax (voiced by Michael Kovach), a callous 22-year old man who enjoys bullying the other cast members, fashioning himself as a comical, fourth wall-breaking trickster. His avatar is a tall purple humanoid rabbit.

Ragatha (voiced by Amanda Hufford), a kindly 30-year old real estate agent who attempts to maintain an optimistic attitude towards her situation while habitually internalising her negative thoughts. Her avatar is a rag doll resembling Raggedy Ann.

Gangle (voiced by Marissa Lenti), a 26-year old aspiring artist and community college dropout with depression and low self-esteem. Her avatar is composed of ribbons and interchangeable comedy and tragedy masks that represent her current mood, with her comedy mask being prone to breaking.

Kinger (voiced by Sean Chiplock), a friendly computer scientist who has been trapped in the circus longer than the other humans, and is also the oldest of the group at 48 years old. As a result, he is eccentric and forgetful, but becomes lucid when in dark spaces. His avatar is a king chess piece wearing a royal robe.

Zooble (voiced by Ashley Nichols), an irritable 22-year old who was a one-time bartender and tattoo artist who lacks interest in Caine's adventures. Their avatar is made of mix-and-match parts, which Zooble replaces with different ones between episodes due to feeling dissatisfied with their appearance. The design of Zooble's body is based on ZoLo playsculpture toys, while the character's name was inspired by the toy brand Zoob.

Bubble (voiced by Gooseworx), Caine's AI soap bubble assistant

Supporting

The Moon and Sun (voiced by Gooseworx and Payton Goodwin respectively), a pair of celestial body NPCs that live above the circus grounds
The Gloink Queen (voiced by Elsie Lovelock), the ruler of the pest-like Gloinks

Princess Loolilalu (voiced by Vera Tan), the princess of the Candy Canyon Kingdom
Gummigoo (voiced by Jack Hawkins), a gummy alligator bandit NPC

Chad and Max (voiced by Jack Hawkins and Hamish Plaggemars respectively), Gummigoo's gummy alligator partners
The Fudge Monster (voiced by Lyle Rath), a candy-made creature banished from the Candy Canyon Kingdom for cannibalising its inhabitants
Baron Theodore Mildenhall (voiced by Tim Alexander), the deceased owner of Mildenhall Manor
Martha Mildenhall (voiced by Marissa Lenti), a ghost NPC, and wife of Baron Mildenhall
Ghostly (voiced by WizardzWiz), a ghost in Mildenhall Manor

The Creature (voiced by Payton Goodwin), the undead corpse of an angel that was hunted by Baron Mildenhall
Orbsman (voiced by Benjamin Davis), a humanoid collection of spheres who speaks in an almost-incomprehensible voice
Disappearing Guy (voiced by JobbytheHong), a mannequin NPC that disappears shortly after beginning a sentence
Ming (voiced by Chris O'Neill), a mannequin NPC created to caution against the act of assuming
Abel (voiced by John Whinfield), a mannequin NPC who pretends to be a human

Ribbit (voiced by Skye Redden), an abstracted human with the avatar of a cartoon frog
The Crappy Looking Fish (voiced by Sr Pelo and Zach Hadel respectively), a pair of primitively rendered fish NPCs

Episodes

Background and production

The Amazing Digital Circus is directed, written, and scored by Gooseworx. Kevin Temmer is the series' lead animator, while Glitch Productions' founders, Luke and Kevin Lerdwichagul, are executive producers. Pre-production on the pilot episode began in mid-2022, and production started in full later that year. Gooseworx conceived the characters and designs; she reported designing the characters in under a week. The show's main character, Pomni, was originally designed with frog-like appearance, before changing in development to a jester. The character Kaufmo was initially conceived as part of the main cast, before being demoted during development to a more minor role, due to Gooseworx feeling that the cast was too large. Inspirations for the show include Harlan Ellison's short story "I Have No Mouth, and I Must Scream", along with "creepy early 2000s prerendered computer games and colorful kids toys from [Gooseworx's] childhood".

Conception

Glitch initially noticed Gooseworx's 2019 YouTube animated short Little Runmo, which Jasmine Yang—development producer and general manager of Glitch—felt was exactly what they wanted to do: "It was funny, a little dark, and definitely very weird, like nothing we had seen before". Glitch contacted Gooseworx and asked her to create a pilot, which she then accepted. Gooseworx presented three pitches to Glitch, with the one that would become The Amazing Digital Circus being chosen. Knowing that the pilot would be in 3D, she tried to create an idea that would best fit that style, mentioning in particular her inspiration from 1990s and early 2000s 3D works, "where it looked kinda bad and creepy but was also completely unrestricted creatively". Yang said that the pitch's 1990s-inspired computer-generated imagery (CGI) style and nostalgic references to toys and computer games caught their attention, feeling that their audience would enjoy these characteristics. The Glitch team felt that this particular pitch had the greatest potential, especially due to the nostalgic appeal of the 1990s-inspired CGI renders, and recognised it as something uniquely distinctive that no one else could replicate.

Gooseworx stated that, while her original pitch was "more chaotic and silly", the story unexpectedly became "a lot deeper and more nuanced", with a "stronger emotional backbone", during the show's development.

Animation

The 3D animation process of The Amazing Digital Circus's pilot was structured similarly to most other studios, with dedicated departments for various tasks. They primarily used Autodesk Maya for the 3D work and then rendered everything in Unreal Engine. The series is animated at 30 frames per second. Kevin Temmer, the series' lead animator, who was previously a junior animator at Blue Sky Studios, initially received a message from one of Glitch's founders, Kevin Lerdwichagul, asking him to animate a teaser trailer for The Amazing Digital Circus. During the process, Temmer was asked to join Glitch's team full-time. According to him, he "couldn't say no to an opportunity to work on something so wacky and cartoony". The animators, including Temmer, were given a few scenes to complete every two weeks. They would regularly submit their progress for review by Gooseworx and Temmer, and this process would continue until both approved the scenes. Some of the movements, shaking, and glitching of characters and props in the pilot were inspired by Source Filmmaker and Garry's Mod machinimas, something that Glitch had already done with their SMG4 videos.

Gooseworx had little experience with 3D works prior to working on The Amazing Digital Circus, with hand-drawn 2D animation being her area of expertise. As such, according to Yang, Glitch had to work "very closely" with Gooseworx to translate her 2D style to 3D; Gooseworx became the showrunner and they "worked hard to maintain her vision as much as possible". In developing the show's visuals, they wanted it to resemble early CGI animated films and series without seeming outdated. Gooseworx and Glitch worked to create a balance between retro 3D and toys; Gooseworx initially wanted the show to be "pure and faithful to the retro rendering style of early 3D animation". Ultimately, they went with a "rose-tinted version" of that style. As Gooseworx likes "juxtapositions like happy music playing to something horrifying or cute little characters being miserable", she wanted the visuals to not necessarily reflect its darker story. She wanted the show to "feel kind of lonely".

Release

During The Amazing Digital Circus' pre-production phase in the middle of 2022, Glitch released character trailers that served as proofs of concept testing the series' animation style and visuals. A teaser was released on 27 January 2023. The pilot's official trailer was released on 22 September, and the episode was released on 13 October. Following the pilot's popularity, Glitch confirmed in November that there would be "more Digital Circus". In February 2024, a full nine-episode season was announced to be in production, with the pilot being "upgraded" to episode one. As of 12 December 2025, seven episodes have been released; the eighth episode is scheduled to be released on 20 March 2026.

Initially, Glitch stated that there were no plans for The Amazing Digital Circus to be put on streaming platforms besides YouTube, as they want full creative control of their productions. Later, it was announced that, following the release of the third episode on 4 October the series would become available to stream on Netflix; episodes will continue to premiere on YouTube first, and Netflix will have no creative control over the series. The show has been promoted with merchandise. On the long wait between the release of each episode, Yang said: "If we had to wait until the entire season was ready before dropping any episodes, [the Digital Circus pilot] would not have premiered for years ... dropping all the episodes at the same time is not only impractical but also counterintuitive ... For us, not only is [the wait] practical but it works a little bit in our favor because every time we make a new episode of anything, we can make a big event about it."

Reception

Viewership

Glitch did not foresee the popularity of The Amazing Digital Circus's pilot, which ended up becoming a viral video on YouTube. By late November 2023 it had surpassed 150 million views, reaching over 270 million views by February 2024, and reaching over 350 million by November 2024, making it among the most-watched animation pilots in the history of YouTube. As of January 2026, the pilot stands at around 406 million views. "Candy Carrier Chaos!" surpassed 30 million views the day after its release, and by September 2024, it had accumulated over 121 million views. Within a week of premiering on Netflix, The Amazing Digital Circus reached number four on the Netflix Top Ten. According to a survey conducted in 2024, 22% of people in the United States aged 14 to 24 stated that they have heard of the show.

Critical reception

Critics praised The Amazing Digital Circus's pilot episode. Justin Guerrero of Comics Beat called it "wonderful and expressive", while Jamie Lang of Cartoon Brew and Jade King of TheGamer felt it was bright, colourful, and fun. Lang further complimented that its aesthetic elements feel familiar without being cliché, giving a modern vibe to early CGI. Common Sense Media reviewer Stephanie Morgan praised the innovative animation and distinctive setting. Trill Mag's Riley Miller praised the self-aware nature of the series and the distinctiveness of the characters.

Some critics noted the episode's dark humour and story; King praised the contrast it gave with the visuals, while Morgan described the show as "quirky ... with a touch of darkness". Zachary Moser of ScreenRant said that the series "deals with existential questions about reality and nihilism". Critics highlighted the episode's jokes, with Lang describing them as "timed with frame-to-frame perfection", with a "mature" sense of humour, and Morgan praising the clever fourth-wall-breaking jokes. Morgan however criticised the "repetitive nature of the character traits". Muhammad Emil Fajri analyzed that Pomni experiences the five stages of grief in the pilot episode.

Gail Sherman of Boing Boing described the second episode as "a candy-coated existential crisis" and called both the first and second episodes "brutal".

Cultural impact

The Amazing Digital Circus received a notable amount of fan creations and memes, along with gaining popularity on TikTok. By December 2024, YouTube videos related to The Amazing Digital Circus totaled 25 billion views. The popularity experienced by the series in Japan lead to themed pop-up stores in Tokyo, Osaka, and Nagoya, alongside a manga adaptation serialised in CoroCoro Comic and CoroCoro Ichiban! starting 21 October 2024. The series also saw a notable wave of unauthorised content, including both content farm media and stage shows performed in various locations across Mexico, in addition to counterfeit merchandise.

Awards and nominations
