Colossus is a supercomputer developed by xAI. Construction began in 2024 in Memphis, Tennessee, and operation started in July 2024. It is currently believed to be the world's largest AI supercomputer. Colossus's primary purpose is to train the company’s chatbot, Grok. In addition, Colossus provides computing support to the social-media platform X and to other ventures of Elon Musk, such as SpaceX.

Background
Colossus was launched in September 2024 at a former Electrolux site in South Memphis to train the AI language model Grok. Reportedly, within 19 days of the project's conception, xAI was ready to begin construction. In comparison, other data centers have taken an average of four years to finalize project plans and ship equipment.
The site was chosen because the abandoned Electrolux building could be repurposed to expedite construction. Another advantage of the site was its proximity to a nearby wastewater treatment facility providing a water source. As of February 2025, xAI plans to build an $80 million facility to process additional wastewater for use at the supercomputer.

xAI
Musk incorporated xAI in March 2023 with the stated purpose of understanding the "nature of the universe". The team includes former members of OpenAI, DeepMind, Microsoft, and Tesla. Musk has a history of involvement in artificial intelligence; he was one of the founding members of the company OpenAI, investing up to US$45 million in 2015. He left OpenAI in 2018, reportedly to avoid conflicts of interest with his own company, Tesla. However, it has also been reported that he had made a bid for leadership at OpenAI and left when his proposal was rejected. The exact reasons for his departure with the company remain unclear.
Both Dell Technologies and Supermicro partnered with xAI to build the supercomputer. It was originally powered by 100,000 Nvidia graphics processing units (GPUs) and was constructed in 122 days. 3 months after the first 100,000 GPUs were deployed, xAI announced that they had increased the system to 200,000 GPUs and that they intended to continue increasing the computer's processing power to 1 million GPUs. As of April 2025, xAi claimed Colossus was the largest AI training platform in the world.

Choice of location
Musk was initially told that building a data center would take 18–24 months. To accelerate the project, he instead looked for a vacant facility, and this was when he found the former Electrolux factory in Memphis, Tennessee.
The global appliance maker Electrolux first opened the facility in 2012, but it shut down in 2020 to relocate to Springfield, Tennessee. The center is 785,000 square feet (72,900 m2) and was previously purchased by Phoenix Investors in December 2023 for $35 million. Using an existing space rather than building one from the ground up allowed the company to begin working on the computer immediately.  According to Forbes xAI had considered seven or eight other sites before selecting Memphis, and that it took Musk about a week to finalize the decision to build in Memphis. With this finalization completed in March 2024, the construction of the supercomputer started right away. The announcement that Colossus would be built in Memphis was made during a press conference in June.
The building was not the only incentive xAI had to choose Memphis. In the Greater Memphis Chamber's website, it also states that the company chose Memphis because of its "reliable power grid, ability to create a water recycling facility, proximity to the Mississippi (River) and ample land." Altogether, the city had the ability to provide the massive amounts of energy needed to run the machine. The site continues to go into detail about how the AI company would benefit from the collaboration with local organizations such as Memphis Light, Gas and Water (MLGW), Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA), the City of Memphis, and Shelby County. It emphasizes the importance of these partnerships, especially once the supercomputer reaches full capacity, which would require millions of gallons of water daily and 150 megawatts of electricity. The city also provided financial incentives to the company, understanding how the presence of the supercomputer could turn Memphis into a tech hub. The ability of the Greater Memphis Chamber to expedite approvals and negotiations also allowed for the project's quick initiation, which was deeply important to Musk and the xAI team.

Environmental impact
AI data centers require "extensive amounts of energy".  At the site of Colossus in South Memphis, the grid connection was only 8 MW, so xAI applied to temporarily set up more than a dozen gas turbines (Voltagrid’s 2.5 MW units and Solar Turbines’ 16 MW SMT-130s) which would steadily burn methane gas from a 16-inch natural gas main. However, according to advocacy groups, aerial imagery in April 2025 showed 35 gas turbines had been set up at a combined 422 MW. These turbines have been estimated to generate about "72 megawatts, which is approximately 3% of the (TVA) power grid". According to the Southern Environmental Law Center (SELC), the higher number of gas turbines and the subsequent emissions requires xAI to have a 'major source permit', however, the emissions from the turbines are similar to the nearby large gas-powered utility plants.
In Memphis, xAI was able to sidestep some environmental rules in the construction of Colossus, such as operating without permits for the on-site methane gas turbines because they are "portable". The Shelby County Health department told NPR that "it only regulates gas-burning generators if they're in the same location for more than 364 days."
In November 2024, the grid connection was upgraded to 150 MW, and some turbines were removed.
Along with high electricity needs, the expected water demand is over five million gallons of water per day in "... an area where arsenic pollution threatens the drinking water supply." This is reported by the non-profit Protect Our Aquifer, a community organization founded to protect the drinking water in Memphis.
While xAI has stated they plan to work with MLGW on a wastewater treatment facility and the installation of 50 megawatts of large battery storage facilities, there are currently no concrete plans in place aside from a one-page factsheet shared by MLGW.

Community response
The plan to build Colossus in Memphis was unknown to residents, City Council members, and environmental agencies in Memphis. Many did not find out about the project until the day before, or the day of as they watched the announcement on the local news. Keshaun Pearson, president of Memphis Community Against Pollution stated that there is a historical lack of transparency and communication surrounding environmental issues in Memphis. Some community members in Memphis have expressed concern about the potential for additional air and water pollution caused by the supercomputer. In a letter to the Shelby County Health Department, the Southern Environmental Law Center stated the emissions from the turbines make the facility "...likely the largest industrial emitter of NOx in Memphis..." This is due to data supplied by the manufacturer showing that "...xAI emits between 1,200 and 2,000 tons of smog-forming nitrogen oxides (NOx)..."
At a public Shelby County Commissioner's hearing on April 9, 2025, residents living near the site of Colossus voiced complaints about air quality noting that they have chronic respiratory issues related to living in a polluted section of Memphis. One woman said she smells "everything but the right thing and the right thing is the clean air." Other residents voiced frustration that Brent Mayo, the senior xAI official responsible for building out xAI's infrastructure, did not show up to the meeting to discuss concerns with the community.
Keshaun Pearson also stated that "We're getting more and more days a year where it is unhealthy for us to go outside." People living near the site of Colossus have said they were not offered the opportunity for a public review of the plans nor were they provided with information for how their community could potentially benefit.
The community is concerned about strain on the power grid as well. Memphis peak demand is around 3 GW. In November 2024, TVA approved xAI's request for access to more than 100 megawatts of power, enough electricity to power 100,000 homes, to Colossus which is supplied by MLGW.  This fear is not unfounded, as the electric grid in Tennessee, including Memphis, has been strained during previous extreme weather events. In December 2022, MLGW imposed (then rescinded) rolling blackouts during several days of extreme cold that put a strain on the power grid. In a letter to the TVA, the SELC "urged the agency to 'prioritize Memphis families' access to reliable power over the 'secondary purpose' of serving xAI".

Current progress
In early December 2024, Ted Townsend detailed how the power of Colossus doubled in its processing capability. When it first went online in September 2024, it was using "100,000 Nvidia H100 processing chips". Still, this initial launch demonstrated Colossus to be the largest supercomputer globally. The maximum power consumption increased from 150 to 250 MW.
As of June 2025, the supercomputer consists of 150,000 H100 GPUs, 50,000 H200 GPUs and 30,000 GB200 GPUs. Another 110,000 GB200 GPUs are to be brought online at a second data center also in the Memphis area. The expansion of this supercomputer has already been discussed and will be the second phase of the project. It is stated that it will add 320 new jobs. Not only that, but in its expansion, xAI also plans to increase Colossus to 1 million graphics processing units. Since the current state of the supercomputer is using gas turbines for power, it is temporarily relying on them alongside 168 Tesla Mega Packs. As part of this prospective expansion, xAI is also looking to add more Mega Packs, which could later allow the center to no longer depend on Memphis's gas and water grid. Townsend also mentioned how xAI "is [also] expected to act as a data hub for Musk's other companies, including X and SpaceX."
The expansion continued in March 2025 when xAI purchased a 1,000,000 square feet (93,000 m2) site in the Whitehaven area of Memphis. xAI employee Brent Mayo said that the addition of this property "...ensures [xAI] remain at the forefront of AI innovation...in Memphis." The property was purchased for almost $80 million, by CTC Property LLC, an affiliate of xAI. The Memphis City Council also approved xAI's wastewater recycling plant expansion. Plans for the expansion were initially revealed by the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation when preliminary plans for the facility were filed on September 18, 2024, for the project "...between xAI, Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA), and Nucor Steel..." At the time, xAI representatives detailed its estimated cost to be $78 million, which was to be privately funded. In March 2025, approval was officially granted for this expansion, including "...the sale of 13 acres for a wastewater recycling plant near the supercomputer in southwest Memphis." The final cost of the project was revealed to be $80 million for construction.