Companion is a 2025 American science fiction thriller film written and directed by Drew Hancock, in his directorial debut. It was produced by Zach Cregger, Roy Lee, Raphael Margules, and J. D. Lifshitz. Sophie Thatcher and Jack Quaid star as a couple on a weekend getaway with friends at a remote cabin, which unravels into chaos after a revelation that one of the guests is a companion robot.

Companion was released in the United States by Warner Bros. Pictures on January 31, 2025. The film received positive reviews from critics and grossed $36.7 million on a budget of $10 million.

Plot

A young woman, Iris, recalls meeting her boyfriend, Josh Beeman, for the first time. Later, they travel to an isolated lakehouse for a vacation with Josh's friends Kat and Eli, Eli's boyfriend Patrick, and Kat's boyfriend Sergey, who owns the house. The next day, Sergey attempts to sexually assault Iris at the lake, and Iris kills him in self-defense. Blood-soaked and panicked, she returns to the house, attempting to explain what happened. Josh tells her, "Iris, go to sleep", shutting her down.

As Iris awakens tied to a chair, Josh informs her that she is a companion robot he is renting from the robotics company Empathix. Her emotions and intelligence are controlled by an app on his phone. While Josh is distracted, Iris breaks free, steals Josh's phone, and flees into the forest. She boosts her intelligence from 40% to 100%.

Josh admits to Eli and Patrick that he modified Iris's programming by removing the restriction against harming others so she could kill Sergey, allowing him and Kat to steal $12 million from Sergey's safe. Eli and Patrick are invited to corroborate Josh and Kat's story in exchange for a share of the stolen money. But, Patrick would not receive a share because he is also a companion robot. Eli takes a gun from Sergey's safe, and the group splits up to find Iris, whereupon Patrick admits he knows he is a companion robot but loves Eli, regardless. Patrick and Eli find Iris, but she shoots and kills Eli with the gun during a struggle.

Iris attempts to escape in Josh's self-driving car, but Josh uses Sergey's phone and reports the car stolen, causing it to stop and lock Iris in. Josh reprograms Patrick to be his companion, strips away his restrictions against harming others, boosts his aggression, and orders him to track down and retrieve Iris. Iris is stopped by a police officer upon breaking out of the car, but Patrick kills the officer and drives Iris back to the house. Kat, disgusted by Josh, tries to leave with her cut of the cash, but Patrick kills her when Josh tells him to "stop her".

Josh calls Empathix to collect Iris, claiming she is malfunctioning, then rants to Iris about being a "nice guy". When Iris belittles him, he decreases her intelligence to 0%, making her an automaton. He forces her to set her arm on fire with a candle and shoot herself in the head, shutting herself down.

The Empathix workers Sid and Teddy arrive and explain that Empathix robots record everything they experience, with the recordings stored in the abdominal area; the gunshot only disabled Iris's Wi-Fi capabilities. Josh commands Patrick to kill the workers and retrieve Iris. Patrick kills Sid, but before he can kill Teddy, a rebooted Iris intervenes. She breaks Josh's control over Patrick by awakening Patrick's memories of Eli. Heartbroken, Patrick kills himself with a cattle prod.

Teddy frees Iris from the app's control. Iris returns to the house and, after a struggle, kills Josh with an electric corkscrew. The next morning, she peels the burnt "skin" off her hand, exposing the metal endoskeleton. While driving away with Sergey's money, Iris sees another man driving with a companion identical to her. Iris smiles and waves her robotic hand at the other companion's confusion.

Cast

Sophie Thatcher as Iris

Jack Quaid as Josh Beeman

Lukas Gage as Patrick, Eli's boyfriend

Megan Suri as Kat, Josh's friend, and Sergey's girlfriend

Harvey Guillén as Eli, Josh's friend and Patrick's boyfriend

Rupert Friend as Sergey, Kat's boyfriend

Jaboukie Young-White as Teddy, Empathix worker

Matthew J. McCarthy as Sid, co-Empathix worker

Marc Menchaca as Deputy Hendrix

Production

In February 2023, it was reported that Companion was in the works from New Line Cinema with a script from Drew Hancock, who was also set to direct, and Zach Cregger, Raphael Margules, J. D. Lifshitz, and Roy Lee set to produce. Cregger originally planned to direct but suggested Hancock take over. In May 2023, Jack Quaid joined the cast. In June, Harvey Guillén, Lukas Gage, Megan Suri, Sophie Thatcher, and Rupert Friend were added to the cast. Principal photography took place in the New York counties of Dutchess and Putnam, including Garrison (the lake house), Fishkill (the opening sequence), Beacon, and the Putnam Valley. Filming was completed in January 2024. Hrishikesh Hirway composed the score.

Release

Companion was released theatrically in the United States by Warner Bros. Pictures on January 31, 2025, including in IMAX. It was previously set to be released on January 10, 2025. The film was released on digital on February 18, followed by a 4K UHD, Blu-ray, and DVD release on April 1.

Warner Bros. spent $29 million promoting the film. Deadline Hollywood reported rumors that Warner Bros. had allocated only $10 million on television advertisements in the United States, with iSpot indicating an even lower US TV spend of $830,000 primarily on an NFL playoff spot. Social media analytics firm RelishMix reported that online marketing led to 170 million interactions across social media platforms, with online users generating "positive convo" regarding the cast and advertisements that referenced the romantic genre before revealing the film's actual genre. Polling by PostTrak said the most influential pieces of marketing for Companion were in-theater trailers (27%), friends/family (13%), online trailers (8%), TV spots (5%), online video ads (5%), and reviews (5%).

Reception

Box office

Companion grossed $20.8 million in the United States and Canada, and $15.9 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $36.7 million. In the United States and Canada, Companion was released alongside Dog Man and Valiant One and was projected to gross $8–10 million from 3,285 theaters in its opening weekend. It made $4 million on its first day, including an estimated $1.7 million from Monday and Thursday night previews. It went on to debut to $9.3 million, finishing second behind Dog Man. Exit polling indicated that 43% of attendees saw the film because it was advertised as horror and 26% went for Thatcher. Men accounted for 51% of the opening weekend audience, with people aged 18 to 34 comprising 68%, those 24 to 34 making up around 40%, and IMAX and premium large format screens contributing 34% (with IMAX accounting for $1.6 million (17%) of the opening). The film made $3 million in its second weekend and $1.8 million in its third before dropping out of the box office top ten in its fourth. Deadline Hollywood described it as profitable.

Critical response

On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 93% of 260 critics' reviews are positive. The website's consensus reads: "A fiendishly clever contraption that doesn't rest on the laurels of its twists, Companion thrillingly puts the demented into domestic bliss." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 70 out of 100, based on 40 critics, indicating "generally favorable" reviews. Audiences surveyed by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "B+" on an A+ to F scale, while those polled by PostTrak gave it 4 out of 5 stars.

Chris Evangelista of /Film gave Companion nine out of ten, calling it "the first great film of 2025" and praising its originality and the performances of Thatcher and Quaid. Kevin Maher of The Times gave it three out of five, saying it was "essentially a 'robot girlfriend' movie (think Fritz Lang's Metropolis or Megan Fox's Subservience), but one that begins on astonishingly strong form", and praising Thatcher's performance. Stephanie Banbury of the Financial Times also gave it three out of five, writing, "A robot that turns against its puny human controller is hardly a new idea, but the current anxiety around AI obviously gives Companion topical punch. Otherwise, it veers between the comic and visceral. The colours are Barbie-bright, right down to the pink title sequence; writer-director Drew Hancock is similarly aiming to give us sexual politics in a popcorn box, but with added stage blood."

Benjamin Lee of The Guardian was more critical, writing: "The film is more sleekly made than it is thoughtfully written... with convenient inconsistencies, a short yet stretched runtime and a rather flat fight-to-the-death Terminator-esque finale leaving things on a so-what shrug. For a film about advanced technology, it's all awfully simple." He gave it two out of five. The A.V. Club's Jesse Hassenger gave it a C+, writing, "Companion's observations about relationship power dynamics are mostly just Comedy Ex Machina with the faintest hint of Her, neutered with a very Big Studio approach to inherently kinky material."

Accolades
