The following is a list of characters that have appeared in the television series The Batman, which ran from September 11, 2004, to March 22, 2008, as well as the show's tie-in comic called The Batman Strikes!. The animation style bears a strong resemblance to that of Jackie Chan Adventures, since Jeff Matsuda was the chief character designer for both shows. Many of the supervillains who appear in the series, like the Joker, Penguin and Riddler, are very different from their comic counterparts, and notable foes of Batman such as Two-Face, Scarecrow, Ra's al Ghul, and Mad Hatter are absent from the series altogether, though Scarecrow had early concept art made for him before he was barred from appearing, and Two-Face was planned to make an appearance in the tie-in comic, before it was ultimately canceled by issue #50 in October 2008. Other characters that were planned for guest appearances in the tie-in comic (but ultimately did not) were Wonder Woman, Bizarro, (who both had concept art made for them), Vigilante and Owlman.

Main characters

Batman / Bruce Wayne (voiced by Rino Romano) is a billionaire playboy and philanthropist who secretly operates as a vigilante. He is depicted as younger than his comics counterpart and joins the Justice League in the fifth season.

Robin / Dick Grayson (voiced by Eve Sabara) is a 12-year-old former circus performer who Batman adopts after Tony Zucco murders his parents, the Flying Graysons. Furthermore, he appears as Nightwing in flashbacks depicted in the episode "Artifacts", voiced by Jerry O'Connell.

Batgirl / Barbara Gordon (voiced by Danielle Judovits) is Jim Gordon's 16-year old daughter, who becomes a vigilante after being inspired by Batman. Furthermore, she appears as Oracle in flashbacks depicted in the episode "Artifacts", voiced by Kellie Martin.

Alfred Pennyworth (voiced by Alastair Duncan) is Batman's butler and surrogate father.

Supporting characters

The Gotham City Police Department is the police department who was at odds with Batman's vigilante work until Commissioner Gordon came into view.

Clayface / Ethan Bennett (voiced by Steve Harris) is a police detective and childhood friend of Batman. At the end of the first season, he transforms into Clayface after being exposed to gas from Joker's putty. In subsequent appearances, Bennett battles Batman before being cured in "Clayfaces" where he helped Batman fight Basil Karlo. In a potential future depicted in the episode "Artifacts", Bennett succeeds Angel Rojas as Gotham's chief of police.

Jim Gordon (voiced by Mitch Pileggi) is the commissioner of the Gotham City Police Department. He would later ally with Batman after he managed to apprehend Joker, Penguin, and Riddler.

Angel Rojas (voiced by Edward James Olmos in the first appearance, Jesse Corti in the second appearance) is the chief of police who believes Batman to be a criminal and wants to capture him. He stops going after Batman when Commissioner Gordon comes into view.

Ellen Yin (voiced by Ming-Na Wen) is a police detective who initially antagonizes Batman before becoming his ally. In a potential future depicted in the episode "Artifacts", Yin succeeds Jim Gordon as Gotham's police commissioner.

Cash Tankinson (voiced by Patrick Warburton) is a police officer in the Gotham City Police Department. He was first seen when paired up with Ellen Yin as a brief replacement for Ethan Bennett. In his second appearance, Cash was assigned by Commissioner Gordon to protect Bruce Wayne from Cosmo Krank.

Marion Grange (voiced by Adam West) is the mayor of Gotham City for the first four seasons of the series.

Lucius Fox (voiced by Louis Gossett Jr.), based on the version from Christopher Nolan's Dark Knight Trilogy, is an employee at Wayne Enterprises, an old friend of Bruce Wayne's father, and knowing Bruce's secret identity as Batman. Though he only briefly appears at the end of season 4 and early in season 5, it is revealed he knows Bruce's secret identity and has been helping him behind the scenes for most of the series: having helped him design most of his arsenal, along with the construction of the Batcave.

Antagonists

Bane (voiced by Joaquim de Almeida in "Traction", Ron Perlman in "Team Penguin", Clancy Brown in "The Batman/Superman Story") is a South American mercenary who derives superhuman strength from the Venom steroid.

Black Mask (voiced by James Remar) is a meticulous and ruthless crime lord. He has no fingerprints or distinguishing features, making him difficult to identify.

Number One is the name of several top henchmen who serve Black Mask. When a Number One disappoints Black Mask, he either demotes that person or disposes of them, followed by a random minion becoming the new Number One.

The first Number One (voiced by Diedrich Bader) is a silver-haired man who wore tactical goggles. Though Black Mask used his shock gun on this Number One, he popped up alive in later appearances like getting captured by Rumor or helping to fight Superman.

The second Number One was dressed as a basic Black Mask thug. This Number One's status was unknown.

The third Number One (voiced by John Mariano) had black hair and wore tactical goggles. When Black Mask exposed him to the Nth Element when he questioned his plan, this Number One was allowed to fly up towards the atmosphere.

The fourth Number One is an eyepatch-wearing woman.

The Black Mask Thugs are the basic minions of Black Mask.

Catwoman / Selina Kyle (voiced by Gina Gershon) is a professional cat burglar and activist. Catwoman is the only recurring villain in the series who's never arrested and never unmasked by Batman, leaving it unlikely he even knows her true identity.

Clayface / Basil Karlo (voiced by Wallace Langham in "Clayfaces", Lex Lang in "The Batman/Superman Story") is a failed actor who steals a sample of Joker Putty and gains superpowers in a bid to gain attention. Though he and Ethan Bennett were subjected to the cure by Batman, Basil discovered that he still has his abilities when he reached for a fallen chess piece following his chess game with Joker.

Cluemaster / Arthur Brown (voiced by Glenn Shadix as an adult, Kath Soucie as a child) is a former game show contestant who seeks revenge on those he believes rigged the show and cost him his title as champion. Though he became obese while living in his mother's basement, he somehow built up the strength to support his body weight and is shown to make use of this strength when he fought Batman.

Cluemaster's Minions are the dwarfish servants of Cluemaster who wear full masks. They are implied to be members of Cluemaster's former baseball team.

Captain Slash (voiced by Diedrich Bader) is a villain from an in-universe video game played by Robin and Marty Slack.

Count Dracula (voiced by Peter Stormare) is a deceased vampire who the Penguin accidentally resurrects using his blood.

Count Vertigo (voiced by Greg Ellis) is a former employee of Queen Industries who uses an eyepiece to induce vertigo.

Everywhere Man / John Marlowe (voiced by Brandon Routh) is a physicist, art collector, and friend of Bruce Wayne. He creates a machine that can duplicate matter and uses it to clone himself only for one of the clones to become evil and take his place. With help from the real Marlowe, Batman and Robin defeated the fake Marlowe and his clones.

Firefly / Garfield Lynns / Phosphorus (voiced by Jason Marsden) is an arsonist who wields a bug-like suit. Late in the series, he steals a phosphorus isotope and is accidentally transformed into a metahuman with innate fire abilities.

Dr. Jane "Blaze" Blaisedale (voiced by Rachael MacFarlane) is a disgraced nuclear physicist and ally of Firefly.

Gearhead / Nathaniel Finch (voiced by Will Friedle) is a criminal racer who can hack into vehicles and possesses retractable claws. The Batman Strikes! reveals him to be a former underground racing celebrity who was injured in an accident and rendered quadriplegic before an unknown doctor gave him cybernetic implants.

Francis Grey (voiced by Dave Foley) is a clockmaker and thief who stole a pocket watch which led to his arrest after he bumped into a police officer and sent a hot dog cart into traffic causing a power outage, a four car pileup, and a tanker truck exploding. After being imprisoned for years, Grey develops the ability to rewind time for a specific amount of seconds and battles Batman. After his son was killed in a poison bomb that was meant to take out Gotham City, he screamed in anguish enough to rewind back to the day he stole the pocket watch. He decides not to steal the pocket watch causing the timeline to change. In the present, he now runs a clock repair company with his son.

The Joining is an extraterrestrial technology-based collective entity intent on absorbing Earth. They battle Batman in the fourth and fifth season finales, "The Joining" and "Lost Heroes", with "The Joining" seeing Batman form the Justice League to combat them.

Joker (voiced by Kevin Michael Richardson) is Batman's maniacal nemesis, bent on causing chaos and making people laugh. While this version of Joker has green dreadlocks and is shown to be barefoot, he does wear spats-like coverings when he later wears his traditional suit. He wields various gadgets, but is equally skilled in combat, using his feet as dexterously as his hands to increase his mobility.

Harley Quinn / Harleen Quinzel (voiced by Hynden Walch) is a fired television psychiatrist who becomes the Joker's sidekick and lover.

Punch and Judy (voiced by an uncredited Rino Romano when impersonated by Clayface) are the Joker's silent henchmen. It appears they do seem to finally speak and insult one of his schemes in the episode "Clayfaces" before it's revealed that "they're" speaking because the duo are being impersonated by Clayface I/Ethan Bennett who (wanting a second chance to reform) then proceeds to capture Joker and turn in both the clown prince and himself to the authorities.

Prank / Donnie (voiced by Michael Reisz) is a classmate of Barbara Gordon who the Joker temporarily recruits as his sidekick.

Marty Slack (voiced by Patton Oswalt) is a technician and gamer who works for Joker.

Joker 2.0 (voiced by Kevin Michael Richardson) is a copy of Joker's mind who gained a digital clone body following an accident with a special helmet that Marty Slack invented. The character appears in the episode "The Metal Face of Comedy".

Hideo Katsu (voiced by Keone Young) is the head of a Yakuza crime syndicate.

The Dragon's Fangs are a group of ninjas that Katsu summoned to help him deal with Catwoman.

Killer Croc (voiced by Ron Perlman) is an anthropomorphic crocodile and crime boss. He rarely works on his own, tending to work with other villains.

Vic (voiced by Jim Cummings), Freddy (voiced by Jim Cummings), and unnamed man are three robbers who were recruited by Killer Croc to serve him.

Killer Moth (voiced by Jeff Bennett) is a low-tier servant of Team Penguin. He later transforms into a monstrous anthropomorphic moth after being exposed to radiation.

Cosmo Krank (voiced by Patton Oswalt) is a toymaker who produces dangerous toys and seeks revenge on Bruce Wayne for shutting down his company. Krank also appears in Gotham portrayed by Chris Perfetti where he is the son of Griffin Krank. Shops bearing his name appear in the Batman: Arkham series.

Lex Luthor (voiced by Clancy Brown) is an amoral businessman and enemy of Superman.

Mercy Graves (voiced by Gwendoline Yeo) is Lex Luthor's bodyguard.

Dr. Kirk Langstrom / Man-Bat (voiced by Peter MacNicol) is a Wayne Enterprises scientist who transforms himself into a monstrous anthropomorphic bat in an attempt to be feared like Batman. Later in the series, he reforms and becomes Batman's ally.

Metallo (voiced by Lex Lang) is a Kryptonite-powered cyborg and enemy of Superman.

Dr. Sam Scudder / Mirror Master (voiced by John Larroquette) is a mirror-themed villain and enemy of the Flash.

Smoke (voiced by Amanda Anka) is the Mirror Master's henchwoman.

Victor Fries / Mister Freeze (voiced by Clancy Brown) is a professional thief who previously gained ice-based abilities after being locked in a cryonic freezer. In a possible future depicted in the episode "Artifacts", Freeze's body deteriorates and he begins using mechanical spider-like legs.

Oswald Cobblepot / The Penguin (voiced by Tom Kenny) is an aristocratic member of the Cobblepot family who turns to crime to rebuild his family's reputation and wealth.

The Kabuki Twins are Penguin's silent Asian henchwomen.

Pamela Isley / Poison Ivy (voiced by Piera Coppola) is an environmental activist and classmate of Barbara Gordon who gains the ability to manipulate plants after being exposed to a plant-based mutagen.

Rag Doll (voiced by Jeff Bennett) is a thief and contortionist who can bend his body to great lengths.

Edward Nygma / Riddler (voiced by Robert Englund) is a former university scientist who seeks revenge for his prototype memory-enhancing device being sabotaged.

The Riddlemen are the Riddler's henchmen.

Mario / Rumor (voiced by Ron Perlman) is a vigilante who seeks to kill all of Gotham's villains. He is an original character created for the series and was intended as a stand-in for Hush, who could not be used in the series.

Shadow Thief (voiced by Diedrich Bader) is a thief who can transform into shadows and an enemy of Hawkman.

Sinestro (voiced by Miguel Ferrer) is a Yellow Lantern with fear-based abilities and an enemy of the Green Lantern Corps.

Solomon Grundy (voiced by Kevin Grevioux) is a swamp zombie residing in Slaughter Swamp and the subject of an urban legend stating that he was created to get revenge on Gotham's founders for polluting the environment. Ethan Bennett impersonates Grundy in the episode "Grundy's Night" while the real Grundy appears in The Batman Strikes!.

Spellbinder (voiced by Michael Massee) is a mystic with a third eye that allows him to create illusions and control the minds of others.

Hugo Strange (voiced initially by Frank Gorshin and subsequently by Richard Green following Gorshin's death) is the head psychiatrist of Arkham Asylum. He is more interested in discovering how the criminal mind works than helping to cure the inmates. After encountering the Joining, Strange asks them to give him ultimate knowledge, which leaves him catatonic.

D.A.V.E. (voiced by Jeff Bennett) is a robot created by Hugo Strange and programmed with the personalities and knowledge of several of Batman's adversaries.

Temblor (voiced by Jim Cummings) is a mercenary who wields armored gauntlets that emit sonic blasts.

The Terrible Trio are university students who use variants of Kirk Langstrom's formula to transform into anthropomorphic animals and terrorize their classmates. They consist of David / Fox (voiced by David Faustino), Justin / Shark (voiced by Googy Gress), and Amber / Vulture (voiced by Grey DeLisle).

Rupert Thorne (voiced by Victor Brandt) is an aging crime boss who Batman defeats at the beginning of the series. Thorne later appears in The Batman Strikes!, where he forms an army of enhanced criminals based on Bane, Man-Bat, Firefly, Gearhead, and Temblor.

Toyman (voiced by Richard Green) is an evil toymaker and enemy of Superman.

Arnold Wesker / Ventriloquist and Scarface (both voiced by Dan Castellaneta) is a former ventriloquist who snapped and became a criminal after being booed off stage.

Rhino and Mugsy (both voiced by John DiMaggio) are the Ventriloquist's henchmen.

William Mallory / Wrath (voiced by Christopher Gorham) is the older son of a pair of jewel thieves who were arrested and jailed around the same time Bruce Wayne's parents were killed. He and his younger brother Andy / Scorn become criminals to help other criminals, believing that they have a right to profit as much as heroes and civilians.

Andy Mallory / Scorn (voiced by Daryl Sabara) is the younger brother and sidekick of William Mallory / Wrath.

Maxie Zeus (voiced by Phil LaMarr) is an eccentric billionaire and former mayoral candidate who is obsessed with Greek mythology and culture.

Tony Zucco (voiced by Mark Hamill) is a crime boss and former circus performer who killed the Flying Graysons after threatening their circus for protection money and one of his brothers being apprehended by Batman during the confrontation. He used to be part of a knife throwing act with his father, who he accidentally killed during a performance.

Bruiser (voiced by Maurice LaMarche) is the strongman brother of Tony Zucco. He was apprehended by Batman sometime after the Flying Graysons' murder.

"Juggler" is the juggling brother of Tony Zucco. He was apprehended by Batman sometime after the Flying Graysons' murder.

"Lion Tamer" is the whip-wielding brother of Tony Zucco. It is Batman's apprehension of this brother of Tony Zucco that led to Tony Zucco sabotaging the Flying Graysons' trapeze act.

Justice League

The Justice League is a superhero group that was formed following the invasion of the Joining.

The Flash (voiced by Charlie Schlatter) is a superhero from Central City who possesses superhuman speed. His identity is not stated in the series, but producer Alan Burnett states him to be the Barry Allen incarnation of the character.

Oliver Queen / Green Arrow (voiced by Chris Hardwick) is a master archer and vigilante from Star City.

Hal Jordan / Green Lantern (voiced by Dermot Mulroney) is a member of the Green Lantern Corps, an intergalactic police force. He can fly and generate energy constructs using his ring.

Hawkman (voiced by Robert Patrick) is a Thanagarian police officer who wields an Nth Metal mace. Like with Flash, his real name, Katar Hol, is never mentioned in the series.

Martian Manhunter / Detective John Jones (voiced by Dorian Harewood) is a Martian superhero with various abilities, namely telepathy and shapeshifting. He invites Batman into the Justice League after defeating the Joining.

Clark Kent / Superman (voiced by George Newbern) is an alien superhero from the planet Krypton who is based in Metropolis. In a reversal from their usual portrayals, Superman was more of a loner, standoffish and was the one who was reluctant to join the Justice League with Batman being the more friendly one.

Other characters

Bruno Mannheim is a crime boss, the leader or Intergang and an enemy of Superman. He exclusively appears in The Batman Strikes! #44, in which he works with Rupert Thorne and Dr. Lopez to create an army of super-villains and turns himself into a second version of Metallo only to be defeated by Batman and Superman.

Cat Grant, Ron Troupe and Steve Lombard, are employees of the Daily Planet who exclusively appear in a brief cameo The Batman Strikes! #44. They appear with Lois Lane, Perry White, Bruce Wayne and Clark Kent for a photograph taken outside the Daily Planet by Jimmy Olsen.

Clea (voiced by Allison Mack) is a museum curator who is John Marlowe's love interest. After the clone of John Marlowe was defeated, Marlowe donated his art to Clea's museum as he begins a love relationship with her.

The Demons Three are a trio of demons and former enemies of Etrigan. They exclusively appear in The Batman Strikes!.

Etrigan is a demon who is bound to the human Jason Blood, through which he is influenced to do good. He exclusively appears in The Batman Strikes!.

Hamilton Hill (voiced by Lex Lang) briefly appears in the two-part episode "The Batman/Superman Story", as the new mayor of Gotham City after Marion Grange's apparent resignation. Unlike his comics counterpart, this version is African-American and does not appear to be corrupt. He would make one further cameo appearance in The Batman Strikes! #47.

Harvey Bullock and Renee Montoya make a brief cameo The Batman Strikes! #47, where they were seen in the briefing room listening to Commissioner Gordon during one of Black Mask's crime spree. They reuse the designs their DC Animated Universe-counterparts had in The New Batman Adventures cartoon.

Hotwire / Yvette Brawner is a new young electrokinetic heroine from Gotham City, an original character created for the series, who only appears in The Batman Strikes! #42. Hoping to prove herself a hero, she investigates a rumor about a shade deal by Rupert Thorne, not realizing Batman and Robin are there as well. After defeating Thorne's thugs, Hotwire accidentally sets off a fuel storage and causes a large explosion. Batman berates her for ruining his own investigation, before Thorne's hired muscle, Bane, reveals himself. After Robin is taken out, Hotwire charges Bane with her powers, impressing Batman. Still considering her a liability due to her inexperience, he sends her to Martian Manhunter for further training.

Jimmy Olsen (voiced by Jack DeSena) is a young employee at the Daily Planet and a friend of Superman.

Lois Lane (voiced by Dana Delany) is a reporter for the Daily Planet and a friend of Superman.

Dr. Lopez is a South-American scientist working deep in the Amazon. He only appears in The Batman Strikes! #12, where it was revealed he was responsible for the creation of the villain Bane. He eventually forms an alliance with Rupert Thorne, who uses his research to create an army of supervillains.

Martha Wayne (voiced by Kath Soucie) is the mother of Batman.

Perry White is the editor-in-chief of the Daily Planet. Though Lois is heard speaking to him on the phone when Metallo first attacks in the cartoon, he remains unseen and exclusively appears in The Batman Strikes! #44.

Dr. Thomas Wayne (voiced by Jeff Bennett) is the father of Batman.

Vicki Vale (voiced by Tara Strong) is a television reporter whom Dracula attempts to use to resurrect his bride Carmilla.
