Dominic Harris (born 16 November 1976) is a British artist known for integrating modern technology and classical design in his interactive artworks.

Background

Dominic Harris was born in London on 16 November 1976, and grew up in London, Brussels, and Michigan before returning to London in 1995.  Harris attended the Cranbrook Kingswood Upper School, and then trained as an architect at the Bartlett School of Architecture, and has been ARB registered since 2011.

Harris designs and fabricates his artworks at Dominic Harris Studio, a multi-disciplinary practice he founded in 2007. This studio consists of 25 people with diverse backgrounds including architecture, product design, electronics, programming, graphic design, and workshop skills.

Harris uses the resources of his studio for the ongoing development, prototyping and production of his artworks. Harris also oversees the studio's international projects where his fascinations are translated into larger scale projects that span residential, retail, and public art projects.  In 2015, Harris was granted permission by the Walt Disney Company to use their Intellectual Property for the purpose of making new interactive artworks. Harris is the only artist to gain permission to use Disney's back catalogue of characters, and led him to creating his interactive versions of "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs" and "Mickey and Minnie: An Interactive Diptych".

Harris is fascinated by the idea of using data streams, algorithms, and computer code to generate dynamic and ever-changing artworks. He sees data as a raw material that can be transformed into visual poetry. Many of his installations and sculptures are interactive, responding to the presence and movement of viewers/participants. This creates an immersive experience where the observer becomes part of the artwork itself.

Harris is also the founding partner of a sister studio in London called Cinimod Studio that creates large commissioned installations, interactive events and lighting designs for large brands.

Works

Exhibitions

The works of Dominic Harris have been exhibited internationally, both through direct and gallery representation.
Solo shows:

"Feeding Consciousness" at Halcyon Gallery, Mayfair, London, UK – 2023
"US: NOW" at Halcyon Gallery, Mayfair, London, UK – 2020
"Imagine" at Halcyon Gallery, Mayfair, London, UK – 2019
"5 Year Celebration", Priveekollektie Contemporary Art | Design, London, UK – 2016.
"Moments of Reflection" at PHOS ART + DESIGN, Mayfair, London, UK – 2015
Recent exhibitions include:

In Plain Sight, 2024 Halcyon Gallery
Victoria & Albert Museum
Dublin Science Museum
Design Miami / Basel
Design Miami
Art Miami
Art 14, London
PAD Paris
PAD London
Art Geneva

Gallery Representation
2010 to 2019:  Dominic Harris was represented by Priveekollektie Contemporary Art | Design, a Dutch gallery based in Heusden, the Netherlands, and with a regular presence on the international art and design circuits.
2015: Dominic Harris was shown with PHOS ART + DESIGN Gallery, in Mayfair, London, UK.
2019 – ongoing:  Dominic Harris is exclusively represented by the Halcyon Gallery, an established international gallery based in Mayfair, London.

Collections

The majority of Harris's work has been bought by private collectors.  Since 2012 Harris's work is also being acquired by several large institutional collections, including the Borusan Contemporary Art Collection in Istanbul.  Harris's artworks include some of the biggest and most respected international art collectors and are also displayed in public spaces.

Books

Dominic Harris: Feeding Consciousness. Halcyon Gallery, 2023.

Imagine: Dominic Harris (exhibition catalogue).  Halcyon Gallery, 2019.

A Touch Of Code: Documents the "Beacon" art installation and "Flutter" artwork (ISBN 978-3899553314)
Dominic Harris, Artworks, Edition Eight.  (ISBN 978-0957306325)

Digital Real: Kunst & Nachhaltigkeit Vol 8.
