DreadClub: Vampire's Verdict is a 2024 American animated film directed by Hooroo Jackson. It is the first AI animated feature film and the first AI anime feature film. It premiered on July 3, 2024 and was released on July 26, 2024 on Prime Video, receiving a Blu-ray release on August 31, 2024.

Premise
Sophomore Betty Gray's romance with Duchamps De Ve, the leader of the banned occult group Dread Club, spirals out of control when a rival from his past accuses him of being a vampire. As Duchamps fights to clear his name in court, Betty must race to prove his innocence, while facing an onslaught of hate from those who brand him as a monster.

Production
The film was made entirely by Jackson, directing the film for $405 between February and July 2024 using only AI technology for sound, music, performances, imagery and animation. It also includes experiments with AI editing.

Release
Following its July 26, 2024 release, DreadClub: Vampire's Verdict won Best Animated Film at the Kraken International Film Festival and Best Director at the Miami Street International Film Festival. It was also featured at the AI Film Awards in Venice and the Burano Film Festival.

Book release
Jackson documented the entire production in Artificial Imagination: The Making of "DreadClub" (2024). The book presents his complete LLM dialogues across the six-month production of DreadClub.

Reception
Rotten Tomatoes reports that three out of four surveyed critics gave the film a positive review. Martin Carr wrote, "DreadClub: Vampire's Verdict is an animated A.I. feature film that takes movie making to another level. Writer-director Hooroo Jackson has fashioned something unique with this Gothic horror romance, that not only feels cinematic, but proves to be truly engaging." Bobby LePire of Film Threat praised the film, writing, "This is an intriguing first step into the potential of artificial intelligence in filmmaking. More importantly, it highlights Jackson as a talented filmmaker with style." Film critic Ronak Kotecha commended the film's storytelling elements, noting, "On the whole, the viewer is assured of an engaging pageant of myth, mystery and melodrama." By contrast, William Schwartz of Book & Film Globe criticized the film’s storytelling and pace, stating, “The characters never, ever stop talking. Not even to take a breath.”

Awards and nominations
2024 – Kraken International Film Festival: Winner, Best Animated Film
2024 – Miami Street International Film Festival: Winner, Best Director, Hooroo Jackson
2024 – Mindfield Film Festival: Winner, Best Animated Film
2024 – AI Film Awards, Venice: Official Selection
2024 – Burano International Film Festival: Official Selection