Figure AI, Inc. is an American robotics company developing AI-powered humanoid robots. The company was founded in 2022 by Brett Adcock, also known for founding Archer Aviation and Vettery.

History

In 2022, the company introduced its prototype, Figure 01, a bipedal robot designed for manual labor, initially targeting the logistics and warehousing sectors.

In May 2023, the company raised $70 million from investors led by Parkway Venture Capital.

On 18 January 2024, Figure announced a partnership with BMW to deploy humanoid robots in automotive manufacturing facilities.

In February 2024, Figure AI secured $675 million in venture capital funding from a consortium that includes Jeff Bezos, Microsoft, Nvidia, Intel, and the startup-funding divisions of Amazon and OpenAI. The funding valued the company at $2.6 billion. It also announced a partnership with OpenAI. The collaboration includes OpenAI building specialized AI models for Figure's humanoid robots, allowing them to accelerate Figure's development timeline by enabling its robots to "process and reason from language".

In 2025, Figure ended its collaboration with OpenAI, stating that large language models are "getting smarter yet more commoditized".

In February, Figure AI announced Helix, the next generation of its humanoid robot.

On March 15, 2025, Figure AI introduced BotQ, a manufacturing facility aiming to produce 12,000 humanoids per year. Figure AI plans to progressively use its own humanoid robots to assist in building additional robots.

With a third round of financing in September 2025 amounting to $1 billion, the company's total valuation rose to $39 billion. Investors included Intel, Nvidia, Qualcomm, T-Mobile, Salesforce, and Brookfield Asset Management.

Products

Figure 02

On August 6, 2024, Figure AI introduced Figure 02, a new version of its humanoid robot. The company described it as the next step toward deploying humanoids for industrial use. Figure 02 features integrated cabling in its limbs and a battery integrated into the torso. It is equipped with 6 RGB cameras, paired with an onboard vision language model. Powered by Nvidia RTX GPU-based modules, its inference capabilities provide 3x of the computing power of the previous model. It is equipped with microphones and speakers combined with a custom AI model, developed in partnership with OpenAI to facilitate conversational capabilities with humans. The redesigned five-fingered robotic hands have 16 degrees of freedom and the ability to carry objects up to 25kg. Figure 02 robots have been tested at a BMW plant in South Carolina.

Helix

Helix is an evolved version of Figure 02 that comes with 35 degrees of freedom, including human-like wrists, hands, and fingers. It features Helix VLA, a generalist vision-language-action neural network that can control two robots at once. The system can observe its surroundings, respond to natural language commands, interact with the real world without the extended training required by prior generations. Helix can control two robots simultaneously and direct them to collaborate with each other. Each robot has two GPUs. System 2 handles high-level planning at 7-9 Hz (operations per second), while System 1 provides low-level control at 200 Hz. System 2 plans tasks, while System 1 carries them out. Figure claims that its robots can pick up nearly any small household object, even those it has not seen before.

Figure 03

On October 9, 2025, Figure AI introduced Figure 03, the company’s third-generation humanoid robot. Figure 03 represents a complete hardware and software redesign aimed at creating a general-purpose robot capable of learning directly from humans. The robot features a next-generation sensory suite and hand system built for Helix. Its upgraded camera system delivers double the frame rate, one-quarter the latency, and a 60% wider field of view compared to previous models.

Each hand includes embedded palm cameras and custom tactile sensors capable of detecting forces as small as three grams, allowing precise and adaptive manipulation. For home environments, Figure 03 incorporates safety-focused soft materials, multi-density foam coverings, and a UN38.3-certified battery with multiple safety layers. It supports wireless inductive charging, improved audio for natural communication, and removable, washable textiles. Figure 03 is set to be produced at BotQ.

Legal issues

In 2025, the company issued cease-and-desist letters to secondary brokers promoting its private stock without authorization.
