Full Dive, short for Full Dive: This Ultimate Next-Gen Full Dive RPG Is Even Shittier than Real Life! (Japanese: 究極進化したフルダイブRPGが現実よりもクソゲーだったら, Hepburn: Kyūkyoku Shinka shita Furu Daibu RPG ga Genjitsu yori mo Kusogē Dattara), is a Japanese light novel series written by Light Tuchihi and illustrated by Youta. Media Factory has published four volumes since August 2020 under their MF Bunko J imprint. A manga adaptation with art by Kino was serialized in Media Factory's seinen manga magazine Monthly Comic Alive from January 2021 to January 2022. An anime television series adaptation by ENGI aired from April to June 2021.

Plot

Hiroshi Yuki, with the player name of Hiro, is a high school boy who loves to play virtual reality MMORPGs in order to escape reality. When a game store manager named Reona Kisaragi tricks him into buying the game Kiwame Quest, he soon discovers that it is not what it seems. Unlike regular games, it is a game that tries to pursue realism to a fanatical point. As such, Hiroshi struggles to eke out a niche. Despite the disadvantages, he is determined to complete the game.

Characters

Main characters

Hiroshi Yuki (結城宏, Yūki Hiroshi)

Voiced by: Daiki Yamashita, Riho Sugiyama (young) (Japanese); Johnny Yong Bosch, Michele Knotz (young) (English)
Hiroshi is a high school student who is tricked into buying Kiwame Quest by game store manager, Reona Kisaragi. He is a former member of the track team who quit following an unfortunate incident and he likes to play VRMMORPGs in order to escape reality. His player name is Hiro.

Reona Kisaragi (如月玲於奈, Kisaragi Reona)

Voiced by: Ayana Taketatsu (Japanese); Natalie Van Sistine (English)

Reona is a game store manager who tricks Hiroshi into buying Kiwame Quest. She likes to tease him and her in-game avatar is that of a fairy.

Alicia (アリシア, Arishia)

Voiced by: Fairouz Ai (Japanese); Kayli Mills (English)

Alicia is one of Hiroshi's childhood friends in Kiwame Quest. She has an older brother named Martin in-game.

Mizarisa (ミザリサ)

Voiced by: Shiori Izawa (Japanese); Sarah Anne Williams (English)

Mizarisa is the town inquisitor in Kiwame Quest.

Kaede Yuki (結城楓, Yūki Kaede)

Voiced by: Aoi Koga (Japanese); Kate Bristol (English)

Kaede is Hiroshi's younger sister. She used to look up to her older brother, but their relationship has been strained ever since he quit the track team.

NPCs

Martin (マーチン, Māchin)

Voiced by: Haruki Ishiya, Natsumi Fujiwara (young) (Japanese); Ben Lepley, Krystal LaPorte (young) (English)
Martin is one of Hiroshi's childhood friends in Kiwame Quest. He is also Alicia's older brother in-game.

Tesla (テスラ, Tesura)

Voiced by: Satoshi Hino (Japanese); Jason Liebrecht (English)

Tesla is the captain of the City Guard in Kiwame Quest.

Govern (ガバン, Gaban)

Voiced by: Shizuka Itō (Japanese); Lisa Ortiz (English)

Govern is the queen of Ted in Kiwame Quest.

Other characters

Ginji (ギンジ)

Voiced by: Katsuyuki Konishi (Japanese); Brent Mukai (English)

Ginji is a veteran player of Kiwame Quest.

Soichiro Kamui (神居宗一郎, Kamui Sōichirō)

Voiced by: Yoshitsugu Matsuoka (Japanese); Samuel Drake (English)

Kamui is the only known player who has successfully completed Kiwame Quest.

Media
Light novels
Light Tuchihi launched the light novel series, with illustrations by Youta, under Media Factory's MF Bunko J label on August 25, 2020.

Volumes
Manga
A manga adaptation by Kino was serialized in Media Factory's Monthly Comic Alive magazine from January 27, 2021, to January 27, 2022. Two tankōbon volumes were released from May 21, 2021, to January 21, 2022.

Volumes

Anime

An anime television series adaptation was announced on December 4, 2020. The series was animated by ENGI and directed by Kazuya Miura, with Kenta Ihara writing the series' scripts, and Yūta Kevin Kenmotsu designing the characters. It ran from April 7 to June 23, 2021, on AT-X, Tokyo MX, SUN, KBS Kyoto, and BS11. Mayu Maeshima performed the opening theme "Answer", while Ayana Taketatsu, Fairouz Ai, Shiori Izawa, and Aoi Koga performed the ending theme "Kisuida!". It ran for 12 episodes.

Funimation licensed and streamed the series. On June 8, 2021, Funimation announced that the series would receive an English dub, which premiered the following day. Following Sony's acquisition of Crunchyroll, the series was moved to Crunchyroll.

Episodes
