Good Luck, Have Fun, Don't Die is a 2025 science fiction action-adventure comedy film directed by Gore Verbinski and written by Matthew Robinson. The film stars Sam Rockwell, Haley Lu Richardson, Michael Peña, Zazie Beetz, Asim Chaudhry, Tom Taylor, and Juno Temple.
The film premiered at the 2025 Fantastic Fest and is set to be released in the United States on February 13, 2026, by Briarcliff Entertainment. The film received positive reviews from critics.

Premise
A man from the future travels to the past and recruits the patrons of a Los Angeles diner he arrives in to help combat a rogue artificial intelligence.

Cast
Sam Rockwell as The Man From the Future
Haley Lu Richardson as Ingrid
Michael Peña as Mark
Zazie Beetz as Janet
Asim Chaudhry as Scott
Tom Taylor as Tim
Juno Temple as Susan
Dino Fetscher as Blaise
Anna Acton as Jillian
Daniel Barnett as Bob
Dominique Maher as Samantha
Adam Burton as Dale
Georgia Goodman as Marie

Production
It was announced in February 2024 that Gore Verbinski was set to direct the film, with Sam Rockwell, Haley Lu Richardson, Michael Peña, Zazie Beetz and Juno Temple cast to star.
Principal photography began in April 2024, in Cape Town.
In September 2025, it was announced that Geoff Zanelli would compose the film's score. After providing additional music for Verbinski's  Pirates of the Caribbean films and The Lone Ranger (2013), this will be the first film Verbinski has directed where Zanelli is the primary composer.

Release
The film had its world premiere at Fantastic Fest on September 28, 2025, followed by a Q&A session with Verbinski, and is scheduled to be released in the United States by Briarcliff Entertainment on February 13, 2026.
It was also selected to have its international premiere out of competition of the 76th Berlin International Film Festival in February 2026.

Reception
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds a 94% approval rating based on 31 critic reviews. Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 80 out of 100, based on seven critics, indicating "generally favorable" reviews.
Peter Debruge of Variety called the film "an unapologetically irreverent, wildly inventive, end-is-nigh take on the time-loop movie," and stated that "It takes a virtuoso of [Verbinski's] caliber to execute on the movie’s intricate Everything Everywhere All at Once-level imagination, even if the gonzo idea man here is actually [screenwriter] Robinson."