Gundam Build Metaverse (Japanese: ガンダムビルドメタバース, Hepburn: Gandamu Birudo Metabāzu) is a Japanese original net animation anime mini-series produced by Sunrise Beyond. The series celebrates the 10th anniversary of the Gundam Build franchise, including characters from the previous installments, also commemorating the Gundam franchise's 45th anniversary.

Plot
The story is set in the same universe of the Gundam Build series in an online metaverse space where users can use avatars to move around and interact with other users, including conducting Gunpla (Gundam plastic model) battles with them. The story centers on Rio Hōjō, a boy who lives in Hawaii, and who learns how to build Gunpla from a local hobbyist named Seria Urutsuki. In the metaverse, a figure known as Mask Lady teaches him the art of Gunpla battling, and he strives to get better at it every day. With his custom Lah Gundam, he seeks out ever stronger opponents.

Characters
Main characters
Rio Hojo (ホウジョウ・リオ, Hōjō Rio)
Voiced by: Chika Anzai
A young boy from Hawaii who is an enthusiast of Gunpla Battle and is an apprentice of the mysterious Diver "Mask Lady". Rio's Gunpla is the Lah Gundam, modeled after an entry-grade RX-78-2 Gundam, from the original Mobile Suit Gundam anime series.
Seria Urutsuki (ウルツキ・セリア, Urutsuki Seria)  / Mask Lady (マスクレディー, Masuku Reidi)
Voiced by: Rio Tsuchiya
A clerk at a local hobby shop and the instructor at their Gunpla class, Seria becomes Rio's Gunpla mentor using the alias "Mask Lady". Seria's Gunpla is the ZGMF-X20A-PF Gundam Perfect Strike Freedom Rouge, based on both the MBF-02 Strike Rouge and the GAT-X105+AQM/E-YM1 Perfect Strike Gundam from Mobile Suit Gundam Seed and the ZGMF-X20A Strike Freedom Gundam from Mobile Suit Gundam Seed Destiny.

Returning characters
Fumina Hoshino (ホシノ・フミナ, Hoshino Fumina)
Voiced by: Yui Makino
A veteran Gunpla Battler from the early days of the sport and the Leader of "Team Try Fighters", she works as an advertiser and announcer within the Metaverse realm.
Tatsuya Yuuki (ユウキ・タツヤ, Yūki Tatsuya) / Meijin Kawaguchi III (三代目メイジン・カワグチ, Sandaime Meijin Kawaguchi)
Voiced by: Takuya Satō
A builder and three-times Gunpla Battle world champion who inherited the name of the legendary Meijin Kawaguchi, known as "Meijin Kawaguchi III", and still the current title holder. His newest Gunpla is the Gundam Amazing Barbatos Lupus based on the ASW-G-08 Gundam Barbatos Lupus from Mobile Suit Gundam: Iron-Blooded Orphans.
Riku Mikami (ミカミ・リク, Mikami Riku) / Riku (リク)
Voiced by: Yūsuke Kobayashi
The Founder and former leader of the legendary force, "Build Divers". His Gunpla is the Gundam 00 Diver Arc, the latest version of the original GN-0000DVR Gundam 00 Diver from Gundam Build Divers, incorporating elements from the 00 Gundam from Mobile Suit Gundam 00 and the Gundam AGE-FX from Mobile Suit Gundam AGE.
Sarah (サラ, Sara)
Voiced by: Haruka Terui
An EL-Diver and member of the Build Divers.
Momoka Yashiro (ヤシロ・モモカ, Yashiro Momoka) / Momo (モモ)
Voiced by: Nene Hieda
Member of Build Divers. Her gunpla is the MOMOKAPOOL (R×R), an upgraded version of her PEN-01M Momokapool from Gundam Build Divers
Aya Fujisawa (フジサワ・アヤ, Fujisawa Aya) / Ayame (アヤメ)
Voiced by: Manami Numakura
Member of Build Divers. Her Gunpla is the F-Kunoichi Kai, an SD Gunpla based on the F91 Gundam F91 from Mobile Suit Gundam F91.
Sei Iori (イオリ・セイ, Iori Sei)
Voiced by: Mikako Komatsu
A builder and one time Gunpla Battle World Champion. His current Gunpla is the GAT-X105B/EG Build Strike Exceed Galaxy, the latest version of the original GAT-X105B Build Strike Gundam from Gundam Build Fighters.
Aria von Reiji Asuna (アリーア・フォン・レイジ・アスナ, Arīa fon Reiji Asuna)
Voiced by: Sachi Kokuryu
A prince from the country called Arian that exists within a space colony in another dimension, who became friends with Sei Iori and together won the Gunpla Battle World Championship. He somehow manages to log into the metaverse to reunite with his friend, piloting the SB-011 Star Burning Gundam.
Sekai Kamiki (カミキ・セカイ, Kamiki Sekai)
Voiced by: Kazumi Togashi
A veteran builder and former member of Team Try Fighters.  He is currently the Japanese National representative Champion.  In the series he develops a rivalry relationship with Hiroto similar to that of Kyoya and Rommel.   His current Gunpla is the Shin Burning Gundam, the latest version of the original KMK-B01 Kamiki Burning Gundam from Gundam Build Fighters Try which is based on the Burning Gundam and Master Gundam.
Hiroto Kuga (クガ・ヒロト, Kuga Hiroto) / Hiroto (ヒロト, Hiroto)
Voiced by: Chiaki Kobayashi
A veteran diver, the one responsible for discovering more EL-Divers, and a former member of the legendary force "Avalon", who later joined the unofficial,  "BUILD DiVERS" and eventually became the current Force Leader, and as well as the current title holder of "Hero of Gunpla". In the third episode he is the only Build Diver member who participates in the tournament, while his fellow force-mates are in the audience routing for him and Rio. His Gunpla is the Plutine Gundam, which is a combination of his Core Gundam II Plus, upgraded from the Core Gundam II featured in Gundam Build Divers Re:Rise equipped with the Pluto Armor.
Magee (マギー, Magī)
Voiced by: Taishi Murata
A flamboyant veteran Diver who owns a shop in the metaverse and is an acquaintance of Seria's.
Freddie (フレディ, Furedi)
Voiced by: Ai Kakuma
An alien anthropomorphic dog boy from planet Eldora, a support member to both Build Diver teams, who manages to access the metaverse from his home planet along his fellow Eldorans.
Ogre (オーガ, Ōga)
Voiced by: Wataru Hatano
Kyoya Kisugi (キスギ・キョウヤ, Kisugi Kyōya) / Kyoya Kujo (クジョウ・キョウヤ, Kujō Kyōya)
Voiced by: Jun Kasama
Leader of the legendary force "Avalon" and the reigning and current title holder of "World Champion".  He along with Hiroto Kuga, Maria Urutsuki, and Tatsuya Yuuki are currently at the top of the entire gunpla world community.  His current gunpla is an recolored version of his AGE-TRYMAG Gundam TRY AGE Magnum from Gundam Build Divers Re:Rise.
Susumu Sazaki (サザキ・ススム, Sazaki Susumu)
Voiced by: Ryo Hirohashi
Kaoruko Sazaki (サザキ・カオルコ, Sazaki Kaoruko)
Voiced by: Ryo Hirohashi
Mahiru Shigure (シグレ・マヒル, Shigure Mahiru)
Voiced by: Rinko Natsuhi
Keiko Sano (サノ・ケイコ, Sano Keiko)
Voiced by: Ami Naito

Others
Maria Urutsuki (ウルツキ・マリア, Urutsuki Maria) / Mascarilla (マスカリージャ, Masukarīja)
Voiced by: Ai Kakuma
A mysterious masked woman with a harsh rivalry with Seria and a similar avatar as hers, she is later revealed as Seria's younger sister Maria, who began to loathe her sister after she quit on their dream to fight for the title of Lady Kawaguchi. She later obtains the title, becoming "Lady Kawaguchi VII".
Jeff (ジェフさん, Jefu-san)
Voiced by: Kenta Miyake
A distant relative of Seria and Maria's and owner of the hobby shop where Seria lives.
Mellow Neige (メロウ・ネージュ, Merō Nēju)
Voiced by: Chikano Ibuki
A sentient A.I. who is the current publicity face of the Gunpla Metaverse.

Episodes