Donda 2 is the eleventh studio album by the American rapper Kanye West. It has also been described as a demo, as it was initially released in an unfinished state on Kano Computing's Stem Player on February 23, 2022, with more songs added in an update. On April 29, 2025, West independently released Donda 2 on music streaming services via his YZY brand, with a different tracklist and updated production. Guest appearances include XXXTentacion, Don Toliver, Baby Keem, Migos, Travis Scott, Future, Jack Harlow, Sean Leon, Vory, Fivio Foreign, Alicia Keys, Soulja Boy, the Game, and Playboi Carti.
West began recording Donda 2 in early January 2022, producing it alongside Beach House, the Chainsmokers, Dem Jointz, Digital Nas, DJ Premier, Hit-Boy, Mike Dean, Sean Leon, Theophilus London, and Wheezy, among others, with Future serving as the executive producer. Although West recorded hundreds of songs during the production of Donda (2021), none of Donda 2's songs came from the Donda sessions. Donda 2 is a hip-hop album with R&B and trap elements. Lyrically, it explores West's anger and sadness stemming from his divorce from Kim Kardashian, and he directs insults towards Kardashian's then-boyfriend Pete Davidson. Multiple music critics described its sound as unfinished, and many of West's lyrics are unintelligible.
Donda 2's release was preceded by the singles "Eazy" and "City of Gods", released in January and February 2022 respectively—both of which peaked within the top 50 of the US Billboard Hot 100. West held "Kanye West: Donda Experience Performance", an accompanying listening party at LoanDepot Park in Miami, Florida on February 22, 2022, selling out 47 IMAX theaters across the United States; the event was plagued by technical failures. Donda 2 received mixed reviews, with criticism for its subject matter, song structures, lack of focus, and West's lyricism, though the production received some praise. It is generally considered one of West's worst albums. Due to its initial Stem Player exclusivity, Donda 2 was heavily pirated. Donda 2 did not chart on any known record charts; Billboard deemed it ineligible for its charts due to product bundling rules.
West was expected to update and finish the Stem Player release within a matter of months, but it received no major updates after February 2022. After West made a series of antisemitic statements in late 2022, Kano dissociated from him and discontinued the Stem Player. Numerous songs in a further state of completeness surfaced online through leaks, while others were reworked and released by other artists. In March 2025, West announced that he was returning to Donda 2. Digital Nas, who executive produced the streaming release, livestreamed his progress updating it throughout April, and West released it on streaming services on April 29.

Background and recording
In an interview with Complex on January 3, 2022, Victor Victor Worldwide CEO Steven Victor exclusively told the website that West had begun working on a sequel to his tenth studio album Donda (2021), entitled Donda 2. Victor later told the magazine that it is "coming sooner than you think", explaining: "The procession is starting and it's not stopping." On January 27, 2022, West captioned an Instagram photo of his childhood home in flames with a date of February 22 along with the title Donda 2, also mentioning fellow rapper Future will serve the role of executive producer. He had worked with Future in the past, featuring on his single "I Won" (2014). Most publications took this as an announcement of the album's release date, though it went unreleased on the date. Producer BoogzDaBeast revealed that even though hundreds of songs were recorded during the sessions for the first Donda album, the tracks recorded for Donda 2 were all new songs made after the announcement of the Donda 2 listening event.
Producer Digital Nas revealed that for Donda 2, West instructed him to make the songs sound "more monk-like" and to "simplify the tracks", and if they are "not able to be played at a funeral, childbirth, graduation, a wedding", then inclusion on the album is not appropriate. In late January 2022, the producer stated that singer Marilyn Manson was recording for Donda 2 daily in the studio. Marilyn Manson had previously contributed to Donda and for the sequel, Digital Nas opened up that West does not want the singer to "play rap beats", desiring for him "to play what he makes" and then West would work on parts of his work. Digital Nas compared the creative process to that of West's sixth studio album Yeezus (2013), also saying that some of the producers who contributed to the album were working on Donda 2.
On February 17, 2022, West announced that Donda 2 will not be available on any commercial streaming services and will be exclusive to his Stem Player audio device, priced at US$200, which was previously released with Donda. He explained that his motive is how artists "get just 12% of the money the industry makes" when their music is available on the platforms, calling for a time for freedom from "this oppressive system". According to West, he made around $2.2 million from purchases of the Stem Player within 24 hours of the announcement, having sold over 8,000 copies. However, West making the album only available on the device led to criticism from his fans. As a result of the rapper's decision, Apple reportedly pulled their $2 million sponsorship deal with him, as they were scheduled to stream the accompanying concert. In a series of Instagram posts, West declared that he had turned down a $100 million deal with the company. The first batch of songs that were played at the Miami listening event on February 22, 2022–which were added to the device on February 24–contained half-mumbled reference tracks and incomplete songs; West continued finishing the album during February. The co-inventor of the Stem Player tweeted that official Donda 2 songs are available and always updated via the device, adding that "anywhere else, you're not getting the vision or the latest versions", insinuating that West plans to update the album as he had done previously with The Life of Pablo and Donda in 2016 and 2021, respectively.

Music and themes
Donda 2 is a hip-hop album. The album was described in multiple reviews as seeming unfinished, with Alphonse Pierre of Pitchfork viewing it as an "undercooked" album posing as an "ever-changing art piece" that may remain incomplete. A production style that incorporates "see-sawing synth patterns" was observed by The Guardian journalist Alexis Petridis in his review of the album, who also commented that there is a lack of focus, seeing certain songs as resembling demos. According to HipHopDX writer Matthew Ritchie, large stretches of the production demonstrate West's "attention to detail" that creates a background for songs.
West delves into relationship problems between himself and Kim Kardashian on Donda 2, particularly discussing their divorce. Thematically, this topic drew comparisons to West's fourth studio album 808s & Heartbreak (2008) from numerous writers. He goes into detail about the divorce, focusing on his many emotions and insecurities. West directs insults towards comedian Pete Davidson, who became Kardashian's new partner. West also addresses his family's concerns, disregarding them. He conveys a bitter and self-pitying outlook, seeking the sympathy of others, while showing a lack of both happiness and empathy.

Songs
The album's opening track, "True Love", contains a drum break shared with West's 2010 single "Runaway" that samples "The Basement" by Pete Rock & CL Smooth. A posthumous feature from rapper XXXTentacion is included at the beginning, singing about lost love. On the track, West laments the childcare arrangements brought about in the wake of his divorce. West also references XXXTentacion's son Gekyume during the second chorus, as he reminds both his and the late rapper's children of their respective fathers' love for them. "Broken Road" is a ballad featuring rapper Don Toliver, in which West delivers introspection and declares his freedom. "Get Lost" sees West singing a cappella with Auto-Tune heavily applied to his voice, recalling varying memories of his marriage to Kardashian. "Too Easy" features electronic elements and contains a mantra by West, who uses the vocal technique as he champions self love. The rapper references his then-budding relationship with actress Julia Fox on "Flowers" and alludes to both his birthday gift for her and his Valentine's Day present for his ex-wife Kim Kardashian. West angrily threatens to fight Davidson on the noisy and aggressive track "Security", proclaiming that he "ain't got enough security for this".
"We Did It Kid" includes guest vocals from Baby Keem and the Migos and features lyrics about friendship over a brass trap beat. "Pablo" is an energetic track with a fast-moving beat and a hook from fellow rapper Travis Scott, while Future also contributes a verse. The 2025 release of Pablo has a verse from West that is made with AI. "Louie Bags" is a tribute to designer Virgil Abloh, a longtime friend of West's. West states on the minimally-produced electronic-backed track that he stopped buying Abloh's Louis Vuitton bags after his death in 2021. The track ends with a verse performed by Jack Harlow. "Happy" opens with a verse from Future, preceding three AI verses from West, who conveys his sadness as he repeatedly pleads: "Do I look happy to you?" "Sci Fi" features lush orchestral production and begins with a monologue from Kardashian's 2021 appearance on Saturday Night Live, in which she applauds West's achievements. Lyrically, West tells the story of their divorce and hearing actor Morgan Freeman's voice whilst having intercourse. "Selfish" is a minimal ballad that posthumously features XXXTentacion, with West analyzing how his flaws led to the divorce. Selfish was removed from the 2025 streaming release. "Lord Lift Me Up" has an orchestral style and consists solely of vocals from Vory. "City of Gods" is a Brooklyn drill styled track serves as an ode to New York City from West, fellow rapper Fivio Foreign, and singer Alicia Keys. "First Time in a Long Time" embraces new beginnings and features a guest verse from Soulja Boy. On West and fellow rapper the Game's collaboration "Eazy", the former disses Davidson, threatening to "beat [his] ass."

Promotion and release
On January 15, 2022, "Eazy" was made available as a Spotify exclusive, one day before it was released as the first single from Donda 2. The song entered the US Billboard Hot 100 at number 49, alongside peaking at number 32 on the UK Singles Chart. A music video for "Eazy" was released on March 3, 2022, featuring West kidnapping a clay-version of Pete Davidson that he goes on to bury. On February 11, "City of Gods" was released as the second single from the album. The song charted at number 46 on the Hot 100, while it reached number 58 on the UK Singles Chart. On May 27, 2022, the song "True Love" was officially released on streaming services. It was also included on XXXTentacion's "Look At Me: The Album". The song peaked on the Billboard Hot 100 upon its debut at number 22, and on the Hot Hip-Hop/R&B chart at number 5. On March 8, 2022, alongside an update to the Stem Player website that allowed users who had purchased the Stem Player to stream songs from Donda 2 without having to connect their Stem Player devices to their computers (thereby allowing music to be streamed from the site like a traditional music streaming service), the songs "Pablo" and "Security" were made available to stream for all (even those without a Stem Player), likely as additional singles for Donda 2, with these versions having updated mixes.
A total of 22 songs were announced via a track list for Donda 2 posted by West to his Instagram account on February 18, 2022. On February 23, four songs, entitled "Security", "Pablo", "Broken Road", and "We Did It Kid", were released to owners of the Stem Player via the player's website. Another 12 songs were added the following day as part of an update labeled "V2.22.22 Miami". However, one of the 12 additional songs released, entitled "Keep It Burning", was removed from the Stem Player website and replaced with a stadium version of "True Love", which was then later replaced with "Eazy". A finished version of the song "Keep It Burnin" would instead later be released on Future's album, I Never Liked You.
Donda 2 leaked online shortly after release and was heavily pirated. The album was one of the most pirated albums on 1337x and the Pirate Bay in February 2022. It also led to the piracy of the Stem Player website, since the song stems and remixing tools were available on emulators. Donda 2 was not eligible to enter any Billboard charts per the rules on releases sold with merchandise, as it was exclusive to the Stem Player service. During his performance at Rolling Loud music festival in July 2022, Digital Nas suggested that a finished version of the album would be released later that year. The mini-documentary Last Week, posted to West's YouTube channel in October 2022, featured updated snippets of the songs "530", "First Time in a Long Time", "Sci-Fi", and "Happy".
In January 2023, in light of West's antisemitic remarks, Kano Computing, the manufacturer of the Stem Player, announced that their collaboration with West has ended, and that the Donda Stem Player would be discontinued after they sold through the remaining stock of 5,000 units. At the same time, Kano announced a new variant of the Stem Player developed in collaboration with Ghostface Killah that would not include Donda 2 or any other content from West.

2025 re-release
In March 2025, after releasing an in-progress version of his studio album Bully, West announced on Twitter that he intended to return to Donda 2 when he finished Bully. He released an image that HotNewHipHop wrote appeared to be the album's cover. Throughout April 2025, record producer Digital Nas began streaming, first on Twitch and posteriorly on Kick, alongside West, working on the rapper's upcoming album In a Perfect World and reworking Donda 2. Various personalities were featured on these streams, including rapper and singer Dave Blunts, Rumble live-streamer Sneako and far-right political commentator Nick Fuentes. The album was published to Spotify and YouTube Music on April 29, 2025, with the album appearing on other platforms within the coming hours.

Events
On February 7, 2022, a private listening party was held for Donda 2 at Nobu Malibu, where Travis Scott and fellow rappers Offset, French Montana, Yung Lean, and Drake, as well as model Kendall Jenner, were in attendance. Six days later, West announced a public concert entitled "Kanye West: Donda Experience Performance" for the album at LoanDepot Park in Miami on February 22. Tickets for the concert were first made available on February 14, 2022, six days before ones for IMAX presentations went on sale. On February 21, 2022, it was announced that the concert would be live-streamed in IMAX theaters across 15 cities in the United States at 9p.m. ET. In response to popular demand, IMAX subsequently expanded the live-stream to 60 theaters across the US for the one-night only event on February 22. Simultaneously with the screening, the event was live-streamed on YouTube and West's Stem Player service. It sold out 47 of the 60 theaters, grossing around $313,582 for IMAX. The performance was set to begin at 8p.m. ET, though started nearly 3 hours late at 10:45 p.m. West was joined by numerous guests, such as Marilyn Manson and DaBaby–both of whom appeared at the third listening event for Donda–as well as Fivio Foreign, Keys, and Jack Harlow. Celebrities in attendance included French Montana, Elon Musk, and Diddy. West experienced multiple microphone problems and audio glitches while performing, to which he reacted during a performance of "Jail pt 2" by throwing his microphone on the floor. The rapper later revealed to Sasha A. Berg and Esther Coco Berg that he had been made "to write the word 'performance'" in the event's title, despite intending the event as a work of performance art. His frustration with this reduction of the event's concept led alongside other reactions to him throwing the microphone he was given, saying he began questioning why he was performing.

Lawsuits
On June 29, 2022, West was sued by Ultra International Music Publishing over unauthorized samples of the song "Move Your Body" by Marshall Jefferson on the track "Flowers". In a motion filed at the Southern District of New York, Ultra International Music Publishing claimed that, "During discussions with representatives for Mr. Jefferson and UIMP, West and his representatives acknowledged that 'Move Your Body' was sampled in 'Flowers,' and was done so without authorization or payment to UIMP or Marshall Jefferson. Despite this acknowledgement, West has not ceased distribution of 'Flowers.'" In a comment provided to Music Business Worldwide, Jefferson stated "I've been sampled thousands of times. For that reason I've never and will never sample another artist, because I know the feelings involved." Both the monetization of the Stem Player and the use of "Flowers" in promotional material for the product were cited as profit made through the sample. The lawsuit was settled on May 3, 2023. Despite this, the 2025 re-release of Donda 2 adds the sampled portions of "Move Your Body" back to the song.
On April 30, 2025, West was threatened with legal action by former manager DeAndre "Free" Maiden, who represented Donda 2 producers BoogzDaBeast and Brian "AllDay" Miller, under accusations that West had failed to compensate them for both released and unreleased work. West responded by claiming that Maiden was trying to "extort" him with a $3 million settlement for "beats from people I showed how to make beats to," and was attempting to remove Donda 2 from streaming. In a response, Maiden stated "I've purposely kept our dispute quiet, I believe in keeping family business family business." He ended his statement with "This man has been stealing for years, but I always protected him. I've saved Ye nine figures in attempted lawsuits alone in the past. Gloves off now." West has since attempted to reconcile with the producers, posting to Twitter, "Really wanna work with Brian and Boogz again. Really wanna work this out."

Critical reception
The "V2.22.22 Miami" version of Donda 2 received mixed reviews from critics. Jeff Ihaza of Rolling Stone called the album a "confounding" project that is brought down by West's fixation on "controlling one's narrative", deriding the lyrical content, guest appearances, and the lack of a clear concept, despite praising certain vocals. Slate's Jack Hamilton wrote off its "aimless" song structures and "fake-deep" lyricism, also feeling let down by the "half-hearted" production that has its best-inspired moments "drowned in a sea of repetitive, spaced-out bloat". Ludovic Hunter-Tilney, writing in the Financial Times, found Donda 2 "repetitious and lacklustre", disclosing "serious deficiencies" in West's creativity, but picked "Security" as a highlight. Reviewing the album for The Guardian, Alexis Petridis disapproved of its lack of thematic focus, unfinished production and the lyrical content for its "tedious barbs at his estranged wife", but admitted some portions briefly showed "the authentically brilliant producer" West is capable of being.
The Daily Telegraph critic Neil McCormick regarded Donda 2 as the weakest album of West's career, seeing West assume a "sullen, self-pitying and bitter" persona—"vindictive sniping and whiney self-pity". McCormick criticized the album's song structures and repetitive rhymes, as well as the auto-tuned vocals, even though he liked some of the accompanying beats. Underscoring its "sluggish" energy and "undermining" production, Steven Loftin from The Line of Best Fit felt the album is "nothing particularly revelatory", discussing the expected, repetitive themes, though moderately gave credit to the production. Pitchfork's Alphonse Pierre defined Donda 2 as a "crudely unfinished dump of songs" camouflaged by the Stem Player's technological spectacle. He described the songs as "lackluster" and "undercooked", displaying "a cool moment or two" but mostly amorphous.
Few reviews were marginally favorable. Alexandra Pauly of Highsnobiety wrote lukewarm comments, describing the album as a divorce record that "boasts all the hallmarks" of an artist experiencing "post-nuptial proceedings". Pauly was dissatisfied with how Donda 2 lacks the sincerity exuded by other divorce albums, saying it "reeks of [the] ego" that appeals to West's fan base. Ritchie of HipHopDX opined that West's hyper-focus on his current drama has resulted in Donda 2, "a double-edged sword"—musically cohesive but with underdeveloped ideas.
Reviewing the 2025 release, Paul Attard of Slant Magazine wrote that while West's talent was sometimes evident, "Happy" was the "one truly great song... play[ing] like a bad-decision anthem for the ages". He found Donda 2 still largely the same as the Stem Player release and said the new songs did not substantially change the album.

Commercial performance
Donda 2 was not eligible for entry on the Billboard charts, such as the Billboard 200, since "it is not available apart from the purchase of one of [West's] $200-plus Stem Player devices." Billboard asserted on March 4, 2022, that attaching a new album to a physical device counts as "bundling"—a practice the organization deemed invalid in 2020 and implemented a rule to disregard such tactics from being counted as record sales. West celebrated the album's expulsion from the charts via his Instagram account, writing "Big win for the kid. We can no longer be counted or judged. We make my own systems. We set our own value aaaand [sic] yesterday's price is not todays price baaaaabeeeee [sic] !!!!!".
Stem Player sales within the first 24 hours of the album's release have been estimated at around 11,000 units, which would place the album's gross revenue at $2.2 million. West claimed that the total revenue for the album within the first 24 hours amounted to $1.3 million. Variety journalist Chris Willman reported that West has sold 39,500 Stem Players as of February 18, 2022, according to the rapper's claims. Willman noted that the player has been available since October 2021.
Following the albums release on streaming services, it disappointed commercially. In the United States, it sold 6,100 album-equivalent units, becoming West's lowest selling first week. It is reported that had it had a full week of tracking, it would've sold 21,000 units in its first week. Due to its low first week sales, the album failed to enter the Billboard 200 charts, though it did debut at number 39 on the Top Current Album Sales chart, and at number 30 on the Independent Albums chart.
In Europe, the album charted in the United Kingdom, peaking at number 19 on the Official Album Downloads chart, Switzerland, peaking at number 72, and Belgium, peaking at number 193.

Track listing