== Hack ==
Hack is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics.

Little is known about Hack before he made his appearance on the desolate island of Genosha. He was one of the few survivors after Cassandra Nova programmed her Wild Sentinels to decimate the island, killing over 16 million mutants.

He found other survivors and allied himself with Unus the Untouchable and his gang. He was a very valuable asset on the island since all forms of electronic communication were eradicated or made useless by the resulting electro-magnetic damage. Inside of the gang, he became close friends with Hub and the two of them began to doubt if Unus' exclusive, clique-like strategy was the best way.

When the mentally ill Scarlet Witch removed the mutant gene from over 90% of the mutant population, Hack was one of the many who lost his powers. However, Quicksilver—as an act of penance for his part in the worldwide depowering—stole some Terrigen crystals from the Inhumans in an attempt to repower some mutants during the "Son of M" storyline. He started his mass efforts in Genosha and effectively restored the abilities of many on the island including Wicked, Freakshow, and Callisto. But in a cruel twist of fate, their abilities were amplified beyond control and quickly faded. Hack's fate since that time is unknown.

Haechi

Haechi (Mark Sim) is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. Created by Christopher Yost and Marcus To, he first appeared in New Warriors (vol. 5) #2 (March 2014).

Sim is among the latent Inhumans who gained powers from the Terrigen Mist bomb, gaining the ability to absorb energy and transform into a draconian bull-like creature resembling his namesake. Sim is initially mistaken for a mutant and blamed for the destruction caused by Sun Girl's battle with the Evolutionaries, servants of the High Evolutionary. He later joins a new incarnation of the New Warriors.

Haechi can absorb most types of energy directed toward him and expel it in the form of fiery blasts. After he obtains enough energy, Haechi is able to transform into a draconian creature. In his human form, Haechi possesses a single horn on his head and scales across his arms.

Haechi in other media

Haechi appears in Avengers Assemble, voiced by Todd Haberkorn.

Hairbag

Hairbag (Michael Suggs) is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics.

He was recruited by Mister Sinister to be a member of his Nasty Boys, whose sole purpose was to harass the government-sponsored team X-Factor. During those altercations, Hairbag often fought against Wolfsbane, his opposite number. In the Nasty Boys' final fight, Hairbag was captured along with his teammate Slab and taken to a holding cell by X-Factor. While he waited for his lawyer to negotiate bail, Hairbag and Slab were broken out of prison by the Mutant Liberation Front and returned to the Nasty Boys shortly afterwards. Hairbag retained his mutant powers after the M-Day and opened a lab for mutant growth hormone production with Slab and Gorgeous George.

Hairbag possesses superhuman strength, agility, reflexes and hyper-keen senses. He has razor sharp fangs and claws, as well as flexible hair follicles.

Hairbag in other media

Hairbag appears in X-Men: The Animated Series, voiced by John Backwood.

Hala the Accuser

Gabrielle Haller

Gabrielle Haller is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics.

Gabrielle Haller was a catatonic Holocaust survivor who was awoken by Charles Xavier and fell in love with him as he and Magnus oversaw her recovery. When she is kidnapped by terrorist organization Hydra, led by the Nazi Baron Strucker, Charles and Magnus used their mutant powers to save her and defeat Hydra. Immediately afterwards, Magnus left Gabby and Charles feeling that her and Charles' view on mutants and humans contrasted his own. Magnus left with Nazi gold Hydra wanted to claim.

Over some time, the two amicably ended their relationship. Soon after, Charles leaves Israel unaware that Gabrielle was pregnant. Years later, Gabrielle became the Israeli ambassador to Great Britain living in Paris with her young son David. During a terrorist attack at her home claiming the life of David's godfather Daniel Shomron, David's mutant powers activated, ending with him killing the terrorists and putting himself in a catatonic state. Later, David (who is now in his late teens) developed a disease the comic inaccurately describes as autism, which concerns his mother, who thinks it is a symptom of something more serious. Gabrielle did everything she could, but she turned to Moira MacTaggert for help. She tells Moira that Xavier is David's father and that she does not want him involved. Unfortunately, David's powers began to manifest uncontrollably, absorbing the psyches of two of MacTaggert's friends, Tom Corsi and Sharon Friedlander. Moira had no choice but to call Xavier to help who is assisted by some of the New Mutants. When David absorbs Moira's and Wolfsbane's psyches into his mind, Xavier and Danielle Moonstar used their powers to enter it as well. It is here that Xavier discovers he is David's father. Gabrielle and Cypher are also absorbed and they all meet David's various personalities, including that of the absorbed psyche of the terrorist leader who raided his home. Eventually, Dani and David's personalities returned everybody to their bodies, fixing most of David's mind and suppressing his personalities. Despite her secrecy, Xavier does his best to help raise David.

Later, Gabrielle becomes the attorney of Magneto, who is on trial for crimes against humanity. The trial was halted when Baron Strucker's mutant twin children, collectively named Fenris, attacked the proceedings seeking revenge against her, Xavier and Magneto for their father's death. After Xavier and Magneto defeated them, Magneto did not return to the courtroom.

After Bishop kills David, Gabrielle is heartbroken, but eventually moves on with her life, continuing work as an ambassador. David kills Gabrielle after being resurrected, but later brings her back to life alongside Abigail Brand, Chamber, Karasu-Tengu, and Sojobo Tengu.

Gabrielle Haller in other media

Gabrielle Haller appears in the X-Men: Evolution episode "Sins of the Son", voiced by Patricia Drake. This version is not associated with the Holocaust, was briefly married to Professor X when they were young before divorcing him due to his work with mutants, and hid David's existence from him.

Gabrielle Xavier appears in Legion, portrayed by Stephanie Corneliussen.

Tadashi Hamada

Cockroach Hamilton

Hamir the Hermit
Hamir the Hermit is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. He is the father of Wong. Hamir debuted in Strange Tales #111 and was created by Stan Lee and Steve Ditko.

Hamir is a sorcerer was the descendant of Kan, who started the tradition of assisting sorcerers who used their magic for good. Hamir brought his son Wong to meet the Ancient One, becoming one of his disciples in the process. Hamir was constantly outdone by evil sorcerers such as Baron Mordo and Kaecilius whenever they came for the Ancient One; nonetheless he continued to serve his master in sickness and in health. Following the Ancient One's death, Hamir stayed at the temple and continued to train newer students.

Hamir the Hermit in other media

Hamir appears in the Marvel Cinematic Universe films Doctor Strange and Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness, portrayed by Topo Wresniwiro. This version is missing his left hand and does not appear to be related to Wong.

Hammer

Hammer is the name of several characters appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics.

Eisenhower Canty

Hammer was an ally to the mutant Cable and a member of the Six Pack. In another version, described as Ultimate Eisenhower Canty, Canty appears as a member of the Six Pack. He first appeared in Cable: Blood and Metal #1 (April 1990), and was created by Fabian Nicieza and John Romita Jr.

Boris Lubov
Boris Lubov is a Russian villain who often fights Maverick/Agent Zero. He first appeared in Maverick #1 (September 1997), and was created by Jorge Gonzalez and Jim Cheung.

Hydra Four member
An unidentified Hammer first appeared in Amazing Spider-Man #520.
Hammer is a member of the Hydra group called the Hydra Four. He is the group's counterpart of Thor and wields a technological copy of Mjolnir.

Hammer and Anvil

Caleb Hammer

Caleb Hammer is an Old West Pinkerton detective who debuted in Marvel Premiere #54.
Hammer was one of the characters featured in Blaze of Glory, where he chases after Kid Colt, later teaming with him and other Western heroes to defend the town of Wonderment, Montana. During the battle the bounty hunter Gunhawk shoots Kid Colt in the back despite agreeing to put aside his chase of the Kid to defend Wonderment. Hammer strongly objects to this turn of events and ends up killing Gunhawk.
A flashback in X-Force #37 features an External named Absalom shooting an elderly Hammer in the back after Caleb refuses to participate in a duel with him.

Justin Hammer

Justine Hammer

Sasha Hammer

Sasha Hammer is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. She first appeared in The Invincible Iron Man #1 (July 2008), and was created by Matt Fraction and Salvador Larroca. She is the daughter of Justine Hammer and the Mandarin as well as a relative of Justin Hammer and Temugin.

Sasha first appeared as the girlfriend/assistant to tech-terrorist Ezekiel "Zeke" Stane, providing support to Zeke's attacks on Stark Industries' buildings around the world. Zeke is apprehended by S.H.I.E.L.D. while Sasha goes underground as she's never been discovered.

It turns out Hammer was raised by her mother and they harbor revenge for Justin. Sasha reappears out in the open alongside Justine as Hammer Industries' heads in order to promote a large suit of powered armor that they wish to market globally. Justine and Sasha embark on a campaign to discredit Iron Man in the industrial market, conspiring with the corrupt Pentagon general Bruce Babbage and staging civilian attacks. When confronted about her operations, Sasha attacks with her own biotech weapons with which Zeke previously augmented her body which revealed her criminal intent to both Iron Man and Rescue. The Hammer women launches a surprise attack on Stark Resilient via a remote-server air-strike unwittingly piloted by young gamers on phones-unaware these actions were actually taking place in the real world. Their scheme gets stopped by the combined efforts of Iron Man, War Machine, Rescue and Maria Hill. When the Hammers use their connections to arrange Zeke's secret release, Sasha introduces Zeke to her father's employ.

Sasha later is the new Detroit Steel with her own enforcers. However, Sasha is held hostage by her predecessor who Sasha kills. After Iron Man and Zeke joined forces to create a revolution and escape the Mandarin's captivity, Sasha and Zeke want revenge on Justine for what her father did to Zeke, and kills her mother as well.

Sasha (in her Detroit Steel armor) is with her boyfriend in the African nation of Wakanda, where they're allied with the villain Klaw. Black Panther's forces dispatch Sasha and Ezekiel before defeating Klaw.

Sasha Hammer has been augmented by Zeke Stane, enabling her body to generate powerful energy of an unspecified type. She can project this energy from her hands in the form of whips and swords that she can use in physical combat. Her enhancements also give her ability to fly. Her abilities' limits have not been explicitly given yet she can destroy an automobile and can prove a considerable opponent to Iron Man, regarding her enhancements thanks to Stane as a "masterpiece". Her Detroit Steel armor has also been observed to have a directed-energy weapon in palm of her hands. As an executive of Hammer Industries, she has access to a wide range of resources that come in varying sizes and designs.

Sasha Hammer in other media

Sasha Hammer appears in Iron Man: Rise of Technovore, voiced by Houko Kuwashima in the original Japanese version and Tara Platt in the English dub.

The Marvel Cinematic Universe features the character Xu Xialing (portrayed by Meng'er Zhang), an amalgamation of Sasha Hammer, Zheng Bao Yu and Sister Dagger.

Hammerhead

Victoria Hand
Hangman
Hangman is the name of several characters appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics.

Harlan Krueger

Harlan Krueger was created by Marv Wolfman and Gil Kane and first appeared in Werewolf by Night #11.

After being court-martialed from the army for torturing prisoners of war, Krueger resolved to take the law into his own hands and became the masked vigilante the Hangman. His modus operandi involves executing male criminals while leaving female ones alive but imprisoned to 'protect them' from corruption (many died of starvation while in captivity). After years of stalking criminals with a noose and scythe, he comes into conflict with the Werewolf.

The Hangman next stalks one of the Brothers Grimm, who had been stealing from diamond merchants. Mistaking one Brother Grimm (Jake) for his target (William), he pursued him to a pyrotechnics building and saw him seemingly die in an explosion. He was later one of the superhumans captured by the Locksmith and Tick-Tock.

The Hangman later kills a disguised woman, thus inadvertently violating his own moral code. As he knelt over the corpse in remorse, he was fatally stabbed by film reviewer Matthew O'Brien, who had been trying to stop the Hangman from his latest killing spree, impaling the Hangman through the back and chest with his own scythe.

Jason Roland

Jason Roland was created by Roy Thomas and Barry Smith, and first appeared in Tower of Shadows #5. He was an actor who made a deal with the demon Satannish to make his career successful, but was instead trapped in a monstrous form. He fought with the West Coast Avengers on several occasions.

As the Hangman, he possesses magically enhanced strength and durability. His rope is also magically enhanced, making it virtually indestructible. He can also levitate his rope and climb it without it being attached to anything. He is in almost constant communication with Satannish, who can enhance his powers as needed.

Maya Hansen

Maya Hansen is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. She first appeared in Iron Man (vol. 4) #1 (Jan. 2005) and was created by Warren Ellis and Adi Granov.

Maya is a scientist who developed the Extremis virus alongside Aldrich Killian. When Killian steals a sample of the virus and sells it to domestic terrorists, she calls up her old friend Tony Stark to help recover it. After Tony is severely beaten by Mallen, a terrorist who had been injected with the virus, he convinces Maya to inject him with Extremis too. Tony defeats and apprehends Mallen, but he discovers that Killian could not have acted alone in selling Extremis. Tony confronts Maya, who confesses to assisting in the crime as she knew it would force defense contractors to renew their funding. She is subsequently taken into custody.

Later, Tony believes Extremis is altering his brain functions so he gets her out of jail to help him. She is placed under his custody. When Sal Kennedy is killed, Maya feels she could have saved him if she had been allowed to continue her research on Extremis. She is unknowingly tricked into giving The Mandarin samples of the virus.

Following the events of the Secret Invasion storyline, Maya Hansen disappeared from the series and was not seen again until the relaunch of the Iron Man series during the Marvel NOW! event. It was revealed that she was kidnapped by A.I.M. to recreate the Extremis serum for them and succeeded. Though she was killed while trying to escape, she accomplishes her failsafe plan by sending a prerecorded message she made to Tony to warn him that the Extremis virus is on the loose again.

Reception of Maya Hansen

In 2021, Comic Book Resources (CBR) ranked Maya Hansen 10th in their "Marvel: 10 Smartest Female Characters" list.

Maya Hansen in other media

Maya Hansen appears in Iron Man 3, portrayed by Rebecca Hall. This version is a former lover of Tony Stark.

Maya Hansen appears in the Extremis motion comic, voiced by Theresa Spurrier.

Hard-Drive

Hard-Drive is the name of several characters appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics.

Inhuman version
Hard-Drive is an Inhuman cyborg who is a member of the Dark Riders.

Earth-1610 version
In the Ultimate Marvel reality, there is a female mutant named Hard-Drive who is a member of the Brotherhood of Mutant Supremacy. Not much is known about her mutant abilities.
In the "Ultimatum" storyline, Hard-Drive is among the Brotherhood of Mutant Supremacy members who were tortured and killed by Magneto's followers.

Hardball
Hardshell
Felicity Hardy
Walter Hardy
Walter Hardy is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics.
Walter Hardy is a well-known cat burglar who was arrested at some point. Years later, Black Cat steals precinct papers on the prison holding him. Peter Parker learns that Walter has been imprisoned for several decades and is terminally ill. At the prison, Spider-Man fights Black Cat while her accomplices Boris Korpse and Bruno Grainger blast the wall to Walter's prison cell, the rubble of which buries Spider-Man.

Spider-Man and the police are unable to stop Black Cat, Korpse, and Grainger from capturing Walter Hardy. At her home, Black Cat reveals that she is Walter's daughter Felicia and that her mother Lydia purposefully hid his past from her. Walter then leaves to spend his final moments with his wife. After Black Cat falls into the river, Spider-Man meets with Lydia as she mourns Walter's death.

Other versions of Walter Hardy

In the Ultimate Universe, Walter Hardy previously operated as the Black Cat before retiring and becoming a lieutenant of Wilson Fisk. Using his accumulated stolen wealth, Walter took control of and manages the Bronx on Fisk's behalf. Additionally, Walter married and had a daughter, Felicia, before his wife died years prior. In the present, due to the Green Goblin and Spider-Man interfering with Fisk's operations, Walter joins his Sinister Six to eliminate them. After being injured by Green Goblin, Walter passes the mantle of Black Cat to Felicia and asks her to take his place in Fisk's ranks to maintain his standing.

Walter Hardy in other media

A character based on Walter Hardy named John Hardesky/The Cat appears in the Spider-Man: The Animated Series eponymous consecutive episodes "The Cat" and "The Black Cat", voiced by John Phillip Law. As a boy, he was tricked by the Nazis into spying on Captain America's creation using his photographic memory. When Hardesky discovered the truth, he was hunted by a group sent by the Red Skull, though he successfully evaded them. Years later, he enters protective S.H.I.E.L.D. custody after a heist gone wrong until the Kingpin has the Chameleon replace him to get the super-soldier formula. Upon discovering it, the Kingpin tasks Doctor Octopus with kidnapping Hardesky's daughter Felicia Hardy before using her as a test subject for the formula, transforming her into the Black Cat. Spider-Man follows Black Cat to the Kingpin's hideout and rescues her and Hardesky after he destroys the super-soldier formula before it can be replicated. With the Kingpin's plan thwarted, Hardesky shares his goodbyes with his family and willingly returns to S.H.I.E.L.D. custody.

A composite character version of Walter Hardy appears in The Spectacular Spider-Man, voiced by Jim Cummings in the episode "Intervention" and by James Remar in the episode "Opening Night". This version was amalgamated with the Burglar. In the former episode, the alien symbiote Peter Parker was bonded to at the time accesses a memory of the latter seeking revenge on a burglar who broke into his home and killed his Uncle Ben only to discover he was the same robber he allowed to escape from the TV studio earlier that day. After Spider-Man subdues him, the burglar is arrested by the police. In the latter episode, Spider-Man discovers Hardy became an inmate of the Vault while testing the prison's security system and encounters Black Cat, who infiltrated the prison to break her father out. Amidst a prison break, Spider-Man recognizes Hardy as the burglar who killed Ben. Hardy expresses regret over killing Ben and offers to make amends by staying behind to subdue the other escaped inmates and allow Spider-Man and Black Cat to escape.

Walter Hardy appears in Spider-Man (2018), voiced by Daniel Riordan. This version previously operated as the Black Cat twenty years prior to the events of the game before he supposedly died and his daughter Felicia Hardy took up the mantle. During a side quest, Spider-Man is contacted by NYPD detective Mackey, who tasks him with tracking down paintings stolen by Walter. As Spider-Man looks for them, Mackey relays Walter's past to him, explaining that because of his skill as a thief, the Maggia sought to recruit him. Walter refused and allowed himself to be arrested before supposedly drowning in a failed escape attempt from Ryker's Island, though many suspect that he faked his death to protect his family from the Maggia. After collecting all of the stolen art pieces, Spider-Man discovers that Mackey is actually Walter, who adopted an alias to retrieve the stolen paintings and use them to finance his retirement. Before he leaves, Walter asks Spider-Man to look after Felicia.

Hargen the Measurer

Edith Harker
Edith Harker is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics.
The daughter of Quincy and Elizabeth Harker, Edith was kidnapped and transformed into a vampire by Dracula. She is later killed in battle with her father.

Quincy Harker

Quincy Harker is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel comics and is based on a character in Bram Stoker's novel Dracula. He first appeared in Tomb of Dracula #7–8 (March, May 1973), and was adapted by Marv Wolfman and Gene Colan.

Quincy is the son of Jonathan and Mina Harker, two of the major characters in Stoker's novel. He was trained as a vampire hunter by Abraham Van Helsing, becoming his successor. In retaliation, Dracula causes Quincy's wife Elizabeth to commit suicide (out of her fear of him) and cripples Quincy, requiring him to use a wheelchair. Despite this, Quincy continues the fight, converting his house into a veritable vampire deathtrap and his wheelchair into a personal anti-vampire arsenal.

When Abraham Van Helsing's granddaughter Rachel was still a child, Dracula slew her parents before her eyes. Quincy then took her under his protection and trained her to become a vampire hunter as well. Quincy employed a number of other agents, including Taj Nital and Dracula's last mortal descendant Frank Drake, and formed alliances with Blade and the detective-turned-vampire Hannibal King.

Ultimately, Quincy confronted Dracula alone at Castle Dracula itself in Transylvania. Knowing that he would die soon, as he had recently suffered a heart attack, he activated a time bomb in his wheelchair. Quincy plunged a silver wheelchair spoke into Dracula's heart and was about to sever the vampire's head when the explosives went off, killing Quincy and destroying the castle. However, Dracula was ultimately resurrected and the castle was rebuilt.

Quincy left a last will and testament to turn his remains into a safeguard against vampires for the United Kingdom, ensuring all vampires needed to be invited to enter the country. Dracula apparently destroyed said remains, but it is revealed that MI:13 tricked him into destroying fake ones.

Agatha Harkness

Harold H. Harold

Harold H. Harold is a character in the Marvel Universe. He first appeared in Tomb of Dracula #37 (October 1975), and was created by Marv Wolfman and Gene Colan. Harold is a writer for the magazine True Vampire Stories who happens upon an injured and unconscious Dracula, and steals blood to revive him so he can get an interview.

Harold goes on to aid Quincy Harker's team of vampire hunters against Dracula on numerous occasions. This inspires him to write a novel, The Vampire Conspiracy, which is later adapted into a motion picture.

Harold tracks Dracula to Cleveland and finds him impaled by a wooden fence post courtesy of Howard the Duck. The vampire persuades Harold to free him, then bites him and turns him into a vampire. Despite this turn of events, Harold goes on to become a successful Hollywood movie and television producer.

Like all other vampires on Earth, Harold is destroyed when Doctor Strange casts the vampire removal spell.

Harpoon
Harriet
Stephanie Harrington
Arthur Harrow
Arthur Harrow is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics.
Arthur Harrow is a scientist who has trigeminal neuralgia that placed the left part of his lips into a permanent snarl.

Arthur Harrow in other media
Arthur Harrow appears in Moon Knight, portrayed by Ethan Hawke. While named after the comic Arthur Harrow, he is an unrelated original character, depicted as the former avatar of Khonshu and the current avatar of Ammit.

Jonas Harrow
Danika Hart

Danika Hart is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics.

She is a blogger who attends New York University and vlogs on YouTube.

When Spider-Man's costume was damaged during a fight with Blackheart, she uploads a video on YouTube that states that the second Spider-Man is a "kid of color" much to the dismay of the youth who was shown the video by Ganke Lee.

When Spider-Man disappeared, Ganke convinced Danika to publish a video asking its viewers if they have heard anything about Spider-Man which she reluctantly did.

Danika continued to hang out with Ganke where they started dating. To avoid her deducing his connections with Spider-Man, Ganke asked her to call him by his alias of "Ned".

Ganke accidentally blurted out Miles name. Danika started to look into seeing how much she can make when selling the identity of a superhero. However, she dropped the idea due to the fact that she was in love with Ganke.

Danika Hart in other media

Danika Hart appears in Spider-Man: Miles Morales and Spider-Man 2, voiced by Ashly Burch. This version is the host of a podcast called "The Danikast" and rival of J. Jonah Jameson.

Hate-Monger

Hauptmann Deutschland

Markus Ettlinger / Hauptmann Deutschland (German for Captain Germany), also known as Vormund (Guardian), is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. He was created by Mark Gruenwald and Rik Levins.

Markus Ettlinger is part of a team called the Schutz Heiliggruppe, which was a national superteam protecting Germany. He first appeared in a backup story in Captain America where the Schutz Heiliggruppe captured the Red Skull and abducted him back to Germany in an attempt to put him on trial for war crimes. Although they captured the Skull and subsequently his Skeleton Crew, they later surrendered the Skull to a false Thor, Iron Man and Captain America, who were actually shapeshifting "bioplastoid" androids created by the Skull's lackey Arnim Zola.

Realizing the deception, Hauptmann Deutschland followed the Skull back to America. After a brawl with Captain America, the heroes teamed up to track the Skull. They concluded the hunt when confronted with a false corpse of the Red Skull. The false Skull had been shot through the head and appeared to have been killed by the Scourge of the Underworld, who left his trademark "Justice is Served" scrawled on the wall.

Vormund's next appearance was in a somewhat convoluted tale where he set out with Zeitgeist, another member of the Schutz Heiliggruppe, in order to investigate the slaying of their partner Blitzkrieger, who had been slain while investigating the murders of multiple South American local superheroes. Although Vormund was framed for the murders, it was eventually discovered that Zeitgeist was actually a somewhat obscure American villain known as Everyman. While fleeing Captain America, Zeitgeist tried to stab Vormund with his sword. Vormund redirected the force of Zeitgeist/Everyman's stab and killed him.

Hauptman Deutschland is later seen aiding Blue Marvel against the organization The Terror-Hives of W.E.S.P.E.

Naming controversy of Hauptman Deutschland

When the issues of Captain America containing Hauptmann Deutschland and the rest of the Schutz Heiliggruppe were to be published in Germany by licensee Condor Interpart, the names of the team were changed in accordance with the German taboos on references to Nazism, despite the team being distinctly anti-Nazi in behavior and the fact that Hauptmann Deutschland's name (literal translation: "Captain Germany") contains no actual reference to Nazism. In Germany, Hauptmann Deutschland was renamed Freiheitskämpfer (Freedom Fighter).

Due to a lack of coordination, when Hauptmann Deutschland next appeared in American comics, he was renamed Vormund, which means "legal guardian", "warden" or "custodian". Per Markus Raymond, a submitter to The Appendix to The Official Handbook of the Marvel Universe, Vormund actually should be used only in reference to a "legal guardian for a child or somebody else who can't talk legally for himself".

Vormund in other media

Vormund appears in Lego Marvel Super Heroes 2.

Haven

Haven (Radha Dastoor) is a character appearin in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. She was debuted in X-Factor #96 (November 1993) and was created by J.M. DeMatteis and Greg Luzniak.

Radha Dastoor was the best-selling author of a book about the new humanity that would result from humans and mutants evolving into one race. She planned to bring this 'new humanity' about by destroying three quarters of the world in a Mahapralaya, or 'Great Destruction', as foretold in her Hindu teachings.

X-Factor opposes her, but she is able to sway Wolfsbane by curing her of the genetic engineering that had turned her into a mindless Genoshan mutate, allowing her to once again assume human form. X-Factor shuts down her entire operation with the help of her brother Monsoon. She attempts to cure Jamie Madrox (secretly one of his duplicates) from the Legacy Virus, but she fails and he dies, leaving X-Factor to believe the original Madrox is dead.

Haven herself has no powers, but is carrying a mutant fetus, with various abilities ranging from healing to telepathy to opening dimensional portals into personal pocket dimensions. The fetus acts through Haven, leaving the true nature of the situation unknown to the general populace. The fetus was the product of an old affair that never came to term, instead remaining a sentient embryo. Haven's efforts to cause destruction attract the attention of the Adversary, who uses her fetus to return himself to the world, consuming Haven in the process.

Havok
Hawkeye
Clint Barton
Kate Bishop

Pamela Hawley

Pamela Hawley is a character in the Marvel Comics universe. The character, created by Stan Lee and Jack Kirby, first appeared in Sgt. Fury and his Howling Commandos #4 (November 1963).

Hawley was a Red Cross medic who helped soldiers during World War II. Nick Fury meets her, falling in love with her because of her determined and "stubborn" attitude, but not thinking she would return these feelings. Her father Lord Hawley asked Fury to search for her brother Percy Hawley after being kidnapped by Nazis. Unfortunately, Percy was a Nazi sympathizer and Fury was forced to kill the man. To keep her from grief, Fury told Hawley that Percy died a hero. Hawley would go on to date Fury who, despite getting ridiculed and poked fun at by the Howling Commandos, ensured that she was loved. Despite Fury's overall character, Hawley considered Fury a "gentleman".

At one point, the time-displaced Morgana Blessing and Doctor Strange arrive, with the former discovering that she is Hawley's spiritual descendant. Along with Fury and Dum Dum Dugan, they battle Baron Mordo's minion, Sir Baskerville, using the power of Fury and Hawley's love. Doctor Strange then erases everyone's memories of the event.

Fury planned on proposing to Hawley, but discovers through her father that she died in an air raid, her last words being "Tell my wonderful American sergeant how much I love him..."

Pamela Hawley in other media

Councilwoman Hawley appears in live-action films set in the Marvel Cinematic Universe, portrayed by Jenny Agutter. This version is a member of the World Security Council who oversees S.H.I.E.L.D. as one of Nick Fury's superiors.

Councilwoman Hawley first appears in The Avengers.
Councilwoman Hawley appears in Captain America: The Winter Soldier.

Gene and Alice Hayes

Haywire

Haywire is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. Haywire was originally a character from the Squadron Supreme limited series from Marvel Comics.

Harold Danforth has the ability to create and project strands of 5mm diameter metallic "tanglewires". These wires can be created at some distance from his body, and disappear if he loses consciousness. Haywire was a member of Nighthawk's group of freedom fighters, the Redeemers, whose purpose was to overthrow the government controlled by the Squadron Supreme. During this time he was romantically involved with fellow Redeemer Inertia. Haywire was one of the Redeemers who joined the Squadron Supreme as a double agent in order to sabotage their efforts at world conquest. He accompanied Lamprey and the Whizzer on a tour of the hibernacle, and then led Lamprey into Redeemers headquarters for deprogramming. With his fellow Redeemers, Haywire fought the Squadron, forcing them to end their dictatorship over the United States of "Other-Earth". Haywire battled the Whizzer during the huge battle. After the battle, some of the surviving Redeemers joined the Squadron Supreme, including Haywire.

Haywire works with fellow Squadron members to prevent the destruction of their universe by the Nth Man. Haywire witnesses the death of his girlfriend Inertia at the hands of the Nth Man. Following this encounter, the Squadron Supreme became stranded on "mainstream" Earth. They relocate to the headquarters of Project Pegasus. Alongside Shape, Haywire is mind-controlled by the Over-Mind into battling Quasar to cover the Over-Mind's escape from Earth. Haywire participates in Doctor Strange's failed attempt to return the Squadron to their own Earth.

When the rest of the Squadron return home, Haywire chooses to remain on Marvel-Earth. Sometime later, Haywire happens across a battle between Thanos of Titan (self-styled god of death) and Mantis (also known as the Celestial Madonna), as Thanos attempts to destroy Quoi, her child (destined to become the Celestial Messiah). Haywire tries to help Mantis and eventually, Mantis elicits help from Haywire and an assemblage of Avengers in defeating Thanos's efforts to kill her son. In the process, Haywire hopes to encounter the cosmic embodiment of Death in order to bid it to restore Inertia to life. Ultimately, Haywire gets his chance, but Death does not respond to his pleas. Distraught and obsessed, Haywire leaps into the form of Death itself and is killed.

Hazmat

Hazmat (Jennifer Takeda) is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. She first appeared in Avengers Academy #1 (June 2010) and was created by Christos Gage and Mike McKone.

Jennifer Takeda discovers that her body naturally generates radiation when her boyfriend goes into a seizure while making out with her, an event that leads her family to all but abandon her, said boyfriend to dump her, and Takeda to have to wear a containment suit on a regular basis. Norman Osborn offers to cure her, but is just exploiting her.

During the Heroic Age storyline, Hazmat is recruited into the Avengers Academy, along with five other students affected by Osborn. The group is led to believe that they are among those most likely to become heroes, but quickly uncover files stating they are in fact most likely to become villains. Hazmat later enters a romantic relationship with Mettle, one of the only people who can physically touch her. Desiring normal lives, the two consume a substance that removes their powers; but later take an antidote to regain them to fight the substance's villainous creator, and then proceed to consummate their relationship.

Hazmat constantly emits harmful radiation, forcing her to wear a protective suit at all times when around others. The suit serves the additional purpose of enabling her to focus her radiation into energy bolts. Although her abilities manifested during her teens without obvious explanation, it has been confirmed that she is not a mutant.

Hazmat in other media
Hazmat appears as a playable character in Lego Marvel's Avengers.
Hazmat appears in Marvel Snap.

Mark Hazzard
Headcase
Headcase (Sean Madigan) is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. The character first appeared in Ms. Marvel (vol. 2) #11 (January 2007), and was created by Brian Reed and Roberto De La Torre. Headcase first appeared in Ms. Marvel (vol. 2) #17 (July 2007). He is the son of MODOK who tried to utilize A.I.M. before his terrorist ambitions are foiled by Carol Danvers and the Scientist Supreme.

Headlok

Headlok (Arthur Goddard) is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. The character first appeared in The West Coast Avengers (vol. 2) #10 (July 1986), and was created by Steve Englehart and Al Milgrom. The character subsequently appears in Alpha Flight #93–96 (Feb.–May 1991), #102–104 (Nov. 1991-Jan. 1992) and Thunderbolts #55–58 (Oct. 2001-Jan. 2002). Headlok received an entry in the Official Handbook of the Marvel Universe Update '89 #3.

This mysterious menace found the Griffin roaming the Adirondack Mountains and used his mental powers to enslave the Griffin. Headlok tricked the West Coast Avengers by claiming to have spotted Ben Grimm whom the team was looking for. Headlok ambushed them with the Griffin and attempted to take over their minds one by one. The Avenger Tigra was able to calm the Griffin's rage. It turns out the Thing had indeed been nearby and he joined the battle. Headlok, not knowing this, had not been using his powers to hide himself from sight or mentally influence Ben Grimm and thus was taken by surprise and Headlok was swiftly defeated.

Alpha Flight and the Fantastic Four later contended against Headlok. Headlok mentally manipulated Aurora, causing her to revert to her original split personality, and she then apparently killed Headlok. However, he later reappeared as a prisoner, and participated in a prison break.

Headlok has since been seen working for S.H.I.E.L.D. alongside Bennet Du Paris. They were brought in to deal with a rogue mutant as part of S.H.I.E.L.D.'s Psi-division. The psychic confrontation appears to have left Headlok dead. This death is eventually undone when Cyclops' former student, Tempus, goes back in time to erase a rogue mutant's existence.

Headpool

Headpool is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics.

In the first Marvel Zombies limited series, a zombie version of Deadpool is seen fighting the Silver Surfer. The zombie Deadpool eventually loses his body and appears as a disembodied head beginning in Marvel Zombies 3. This incarnation of Deadpool, frequently referred to as Headpool, entered the mainstream Marvel continuity when he is encountered and captured by the original Deadpool in Deadpool: Merc with a Mouth. Along with several other alternate versions of Deadpool, Headpool went on to appear in Deadpool Corps with a propeller beanie mounted to his head, granting him flight.

Headpool in other media

Headpool appears in Deadpool & Wolverine, portrayed by Geoff Redknap and voiced by Nathan Fillion.

Headpool appears in Marvel's Deadpool VR, voiced by Freddy Rodriguez.
Headpool appears in Marvel Snap.

Headsman

Healer

Healer is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics.. His first appearance was in Uncanny X-Men #179 (December 1983), and he was created by Chris Claremont and Paul Smith.

Healer is an elderly member of the Morlocks who can heal other mutants. His name and past prior to joining the Morlocks are unknown.

In Uncanny X-Men #291 (1992), Healer is killed after using all of his power to heal Callisto.

In X-Force #1 (2020), Healer is revealed to have been resurrected by The Five.

Healer in other media

Healer appears in X-Men Legends, voiced by Ed Asner.

Hebe

Hecate

Hecate is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics, based on the Greek goddess of the same name. Created by Chris Claremont and Sal Buscema, she first appeared in Ms. Marvel #11 (1977). The character has since made several appearances in various Marvel Comics titles.

In the Marvel Comics universe, Hecate is among the Titans who ruled the ancient world that Zeus spares when he deposes them and conquers Olympus, and becomes Olympus' resident Goddess of Magic. She is the first deity to give magic to mortals, in defiance of Zeus who had forbidden the gods from meddling with humans. Zeus later exiles her from Olympus, wiping her memories and stripping her of her powers. Hecate appears on Earth, claiming to be an extra-dimensional explorer, mistaken for the deity Hecate on a visit to the planet some millennia prior. At one point she fights Ms. Marvel.

At some point, she loses more of her memories and becomes an inmate of the Raft. During the Fear Itself storyline, Hecate is among the Raft inmates who escape after Juggernaut destroys it. She assists Basilisk, Griffin, and Man-Bull in a bank robbery until Hercules arrives and recognizes her. Hecate shortly regains her memories, recovers her godly abilities, and decides to take over Brooklyn, reshaping the borough to resemble a monster-infested Ancient Greece. Hercules kills her ally Kyknos and she flees as Brooklyn returns to its normal state.

Some time later, the Scarlet Witch seeks out Hecate after sensing a disturbance in witchcraft. She finds her operating a café on a Greek island and asks for her help. Hecate explains that she is content to remain uninvolved with the world of witchcraft, but mentions that there is a magical disturbance on the island, which could support Wanda's theory that magic is broken. She asks Wanda to defeat a Minotaur who has been murdering islanders, and the heroine discovers that the Emerald Warlock, a century-old mage, transformed Man-Bull to do his bidding.

Hecat'e
Hector
Heimdall
Hela
Helix
Hellcat
Hellcow
Helleyes
Helleyes is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. He debuted in Adventures into Fear #28 (June 1975).
Hellfire is a demon who conquered a "Hell" realm before targeting Earth.

Hellfire
Hellfire is the name of two characters appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics.

Elementals

J.T. Slade

Hellifino

Hellifino (Eli Hartman) is a character in Marvel Comics. He was created by Dan Slott and Paco Medina, and first appeared in Spider-Boy #1 (November 2023).

Eli Hartman is a child and friend of Spider-Boy (Bailey Briggs) who was captured alongside him by Madame Monstrosity and transformed into an African elephant/black rhinoceros hybrid. Madame Monstrosity was inspired by Eli's joke about the hypothetical combination of an elephant and rhinoceros. In the present, Bailey resurfaces after being erased from existence by Shathra and subsequently resurrected. Madame Monstrosity forces Eli to battle Spider-Boy.

Following Madame Monstrosity's defeat, Hellifino chooses to live on her farm with Boy-Spider and Bailey's mother Tabitha as his transformation is irreversible.

Eli is frustrated by having to live in hiding, but Spider-Boy convinces him to become a superhero under the name Captain Pachyderm while using a custom suit that Spider-Boy created for him.

Hellion

Hellrazor
Daimon Hellstrom
Hellverine
Hellverine is the alias of several characters appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. The character is typically depicted as Wolverine being put under and empowered by demonic possession, granting him additional powers similar to those of a Ghost Rider.

First version

The first Hellverine appeared in Wolverine (vol. 4) #1 (September 2010) and was created by Jason Aaron and Renato Gudes.

An unnamed powerful demon was summoned from Hell by the criminal organization known as the Red Right Hand as part of their revenge against Wolverine. The organization captures Wolverine and sends his soul to Hell while the demon takes control over his body. Now known as Hellverine, the demon was tasked by the Red Right Hand to killing Wolverine's friends and loved ones. Hellverine tracks down and kills John Wraith, attempts to kill Mystique and Daken for betraying the Red Right Hand and attacks Yukio and Amiko Kobayashi but the two are able to escape from him. Hellverine then sets his sights on the X-Men and travels to Utopia while still disguised as Wolverine. Hellverine's ruse is discovered and he fights the X-Men, who are joined by Mystique, the Ghost Riders Johnny Blaze and Danny Ketch, and Daimon Hellstrom. Thanks to Hellstrom's ritual and Wolverine's own actions in Hell, Wolverine's soul returns to his body and battles for control with Hellverine. Due to the efforts of the X-Men, Wolverine's girlfriend Melita Garner and a subconscious projection of the deceased Nightcrawler, Wolverine regains control over his body and the demon is banished back to Hell.

Logan

During the "Ghost Rider/Wolverine: Weapons of Vengeance" event, Wolverine is captured by Project Hellfire and has the demon Bagra-ghul grafted onto him, turning him into Hellverine. Hellverine is sent to kill mutants but Hellverine is able to fight off his programing while Johnny Blaze exorcises Bagra-ghul from Wolverine and seals him in stone.

Akihiro

Bagra-ghul breaks free from his seal and resurrects and possesses the recently killed Akihiro, turning him into Hellverine.

Hemingway

Hemingway is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. His first appearance was in Generation X #5. Hemingway is one of the few members to remain in all three incarnations of the team.

Hemingway is a member of the Gene Nation. When Mikhail Rasputin flooded the Morlock tunnels, many were believed dead. However, at the last instant, Mikhail opened a portal into a parallel dimension dubbed The Hill, through which several Morlocks escaped. In this dimension, time moves at a faster rate, and even though it was a manner of months in the main Marvel Universe, it had been between 10 and 20 years on the Hill.

On the anniversary of the Mutant Massacre, in which the Marauders killed many Morlocks, the members of Gene Nation returned to Earth, aiming to kill one hundred humans for every Morlock who died. They are defeated, but Hemingway escapes.

Later, Dark Beast gathers some of the original members of Gene Nation, along with some new recruits, to form a new team and capture others for him to experiment on.

Hemingway's final appearance is in the pages of Weapon X, where he is killed by Agent Zero.

Hephaestus

Hephaestus is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. He first appeared in Thor #129 (June 1966) and was adapted from the Greek mythology figure by Stan Lee and Jack Kirby.

He is the Olympian pantheon's blacksmith. He is not to be confused with the Eternal Phastos. Immortal and possessing superhuman physical attributes similar to those of the other Olympians, Hephaestus is a master weapons maker and inventor, able to make weapons which could kill even Hercules, but lacks the ability to project any form of energy, mystical or non-mystical. He made Hercules's mace, Ares' armor, and Zeus' chariot.

Hepzibah
Hera
H.E.R.B.I.E.
Hercules
Gregory Herd
Hermes
Hermod
Hex
High Evolutionary
Hijack
Hijacker

Hildegarde

Hildegarde is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. She was created by Gerry Conway and John Buscema and first appeared in Thor #195 (January 1972).

Hildegarde is one of the Valkyries. Odin sent Sif and Hildegarde to Blackworld. There, they came upon a town where people were fleeing in blind terror from Ego-Prime, which was created accidentally from Ego the Living Planet by Tana Nile. Sif and Hildegarde joined forces with Tana Nile, and escaped with her to Earth. Ego-Prime came to Earth, and the Asgardians battled him, and Odin sacrificed Ego-Prime to transform three people into Young Gods.

The Asgardians, including Thor, Sif, and Hildegarde, were banished to Earth for a time for questioning Odin's actions during these events. Hildegarde accompanied Thor for a while before returning to Asgard.

Hildegund

Hildegund is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. She was created by Stan Lee and Jack Kirby and first appeared in Journey into Mystery #120 (September 1965).

Hildegund, sometimes called Gudrun, is the wife of Volstagg of the Warriors Three. They have ten sons (Alaric, Arngrim, Einar, Gunnar, Hrolf, Leif, Rolfe, Svein, Sigfod, Thakrad), four daughters (Flosi, Gudrun, Gunnhild, Jargsa) and numerous unnamed children. At some point, twins, Mick and Kevin Mortensen were orphaned when their mother, Ruby, was killed by Zaniac. Thor took the twins to Asgard where Volstagg and Hildegund lovingly accepted them with open arms. When Loki returned, albeit as a child, everyone in Asgard turned him away except for Volstagg and Hildegund, the latter feeling that he just needed motherly love and affection.

Hildegund in other media

Hildegund appears in Thor: The Dark World, portrayed by Claire Brown.

Maria Hill
Tyesha Hillman
Tyesha Hillman is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. The character was created by writer G. Willow Wilson and artist Takeshi Miyazawa, and first appeared in Ms. Marvel (vol. 4) #2 (December 2015).

Tyesha Hillman in other media
Travina Springer portrayed Tyesha Hillman in the Disney+ miniseries Ms. Marvel (2022).

Carol Hines
Carol Hines is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics.
Carol Hines is a technician who works for the Weapon X project. She is present when Wolverine is infused with adamantium and when he escapes from Weapon X.
Hydra later captures Hines and forces her to divulge classified information about Weapon X. Hines dies from fright after seeing Aldo Ferro's Psi-Borg form, with Ferro making it appear that he snapped her neck.

Carol Hines in other media

Carol Hines makes a non-speaking cameo appearance in a flashback in Hulk Vs.

Carol Hines appears in X2: Wolverine's Revenge, voiced by Jennifer Hale. She is seen as a Weapon X employee alongside Abraham Cornelius. Both of them are sent on their way when Logan confronts Professor Thorton. In the present, Wolverine returns to the Weapon X facility to find a cure for the Shiva Strain Virus where he encounters Hines and Cornelius at a mutant prison called the Void. They give him the second part of the information on the cure for the Shiva Strain Virus amidst Sabretooth freeing the inmates.

A character loosely based on Carol Hines called Carol Frost appears in X-Men Origins: Wolverine, portrayed by Asher Keddie.

Carol Frost appears in X-Men Origins: Wolverine, voiced by Anna Graves. Her role is greatly expanded in the game with several of her recordings can be found and listened to throughout the Weapon X facility. Sympathetic to Logan's plight, she helps restore his weakened healing factor and gives him back his clothes and personal items.

Hindsight
Hippolyta
Hiro-Kala
Hiroim
Hit-Monkey
Hitman
H'kurrek
H'kurrek is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. The character, created by Mike Carey and Cary Nord, first appeared in Secret Invasion: X-Men #1 (August 2008).

During the "Secret Invasion" storyline, H'kurrek was a commander of a Skrull ship and a delegate for the Skrull Queen Veranke. He led the Skrull invasion on San Francisco where his fleet surrendered due to the Super-Skrulls with the powers of the X-Men getting infected by the Legacy Virus that was used on them by Cyclops.

H.O.M.E.R.

H.O.M.E.R. (short for Heuristically Operative Matrix Emulation Rostrum) is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. Created by Len Kaminski and Tom Tenney, H.O.M.E.R. first appeared in Iron Man #298 (November 1993).

H.O.M.E.R. is an artificial intelligence created by Tony Stark / Iron Man and Abe Zimmer for assistance within Stark Enterprises.

H.O.M.E.R. in other media

H.O.M.E.R. appears in Iron Man, voiced by Tom Kane.

H.O.M.E.R. appears in The Incredible Hulk episode "Helping Hand, Iron Fist", voiced again by Tom Kane.

Toni Ho
Anne Marie Hoag
Hobgoblin
Roderick Kingsley
Lefty Donovan
Ned Leeds
Jason Macendale
Daniel Kingsley
Phil Urich

Hobgoblin (Imperial Guard)

Hobgoblin is the name of three identical Chameloid shapeshifters who are members of the Shi'ar Imperial Guard. Created by Chris Claremont and Dave Cockrum, the first Hobgoblin debuted in The X-Men #107 (October 1977). Like many original members of the Imperial Guard, Hobgoblin is based on a character from DC Comics' Legion of Super-Heroes: in his case Chameleon Boy. In Inhumans (vol. 3), Hobgoblin is killed while protecting Lilandra Neramani.

The second Hobgoblin debuted in Uncanny X-Men #480 (November, 2006) as a replacement for the original. He infiltrated Crystal and Ronan's wedding and blew himself up to destroy a Kree protective barrier in War of Kings #1 (March, 2009).

The third Hobgoblin debuted in Mighty Thor (Vol. 3) #15 (January, 2017).

Benjamin Hochberg

Benjamin Hochberg is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. The character, created by Charles Soule and Ron Garney, first appeared in Daredevil (vol. 5) #2 (December 2015).

Benjamin Hochberg is a district attorney working in New York City.

Benjamin Hochberg in other media

Benjamin Hochberg appears in Daredevil: Born Again, portrayed by John Benjamin Hickey.

Hoder

Hoder is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. He first appeared in Thor #274–275 (August–September 1978), and was adapted from mythology by Roy Thomas and John Buscema.

Hoder is a totally blind, elder Asgardian god. At one point, Loki, God of Mischief, tricks Hoder into nearly killing Balder by shooting him with an arrow made of mistletoe wood, the only substance to which Balder is vulnerable. As well as possessing the superhuman abilities shared by all the Gods of Asgard, such as superhuman strength, Hoder can also receive visions of a far distant future or of events that will occur in other realities.

Cameron Hodge

Crusher Hogan

Joseph "Crusher" Hogan is a wrestler in Marvel Comics. The character, created by Stan Lee and Steve Ditko, first appeared in Amazing Fantasy #15 (August 1962).

Joseph Hogan, who went by the nickname Crusher Hogan, was a professional wrestler who worked for the Wrestling League. The Wrestling League was losing money due to a rival wrestling company. While his wife wanted him to quit, he instead offered cash money to whoever was able to beat him in wrestling. This worked as people would pay to fight him only to lose.

Young Peter Parker, who had just been bitten by the radioactive spider and was looking to make money, took up the offer and put on a disguise to fight him. To Hogan's surprise, he was defeated and Peter won the money.

Years later, Hogan works as a janitor at a gym. It was revealed that after his defeat at the hands of Spider-Man, his life went to pieces. His wife left him, the Wrestling League fell apart, and he's looked down upon by his peers. Hogan regales stories of how he "trained" Spider-Man and gave him his web shooters and costume. Hogan discovered that one of the boxers at the gym was in trouble with the local criminal Madame Fang. Hogan takes on her muscle Manslaughter Marsdale, but is overmatched. Spider-Man arrives to defeat Marsdale and afterwards confirms Hogan's stories, giving a little bit of credibility and respect to Hogan's reputation.

During the "Venom War" storyline, Hogan and Doc Sawbones were commentators at a wrestling match at Grand Garden Arena where Symbiote Smith was supposed to go up against its wrestlers. The match was crashed by Eddie Brock, Bedlam, Tyro, and Wilde who want his son Dylan Brock and the Venom Symbiote handed to him.

Alternate versions of Crusher Hogan

In the House of M reality, Hogan appears as the Green Goblin, here a professional wrestling gimmick/moniker. Hogan worked with Spider-Man during his early years as a celebrity and is a friend outside the wrestling business.

Crusher Hogan in other media

Crusher Hogan appears in a flashback in the Spider-Man and His Amazing Friends episode "Along Came Spidey".

Crusher Hogan appears in a flashbacks in Spider-Man: The Animated Series.

Crusher Hogan appears in a flashback in The Spectacular Spider-Man episode "Intervention", voiced by Jim Cummings.

A character based on Crusher Hogan named Bonesaw McGee appears in Spider-Man (2017), voiced by Steve Blum.

A character based on Crusher Hogan named Bone Saw McGraw appears in Spider-Man (2002), portrayed by Randy Savage.

Happy Hogan

Jeryn Hogarth

Hogun

Holocaust

Holocaust is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. He first appeared in X-Men Alpha (February 1995), and was created by Scott Lobdell and Roger Cruz.

Holocaust, originally known as Nemesis, is the alleged son of Apocalypse and serves as one of his Horsemen in the Age of Apocalypse timeline. After being mortally wounded by Magneto, he is rescued by Apocalypse and transformed into an armored energy being. Holocaust is later killed by Weapon X member Hyperion.

Holocaust possesses the mutant ability to manipulate energy, enabling him to absorb energy from others to sustain himself. He is later transformed into an energy being who can become intangible and shapeshift, but is forced to wear crystal armor to prevent his body from dissipating.

Holocaust in other media

Holocaust makes a non-speaking cameo appearance in the X-Men: The Animated Series episode "One Man's Worth".

Holocaust appears as a boss in X-Men Legends II: Rise of Apocalypse, voiced by Peter Lurie.

Lilly Hollister
Hollywood
Honey Lemon
Hood
Hope
Hope (Esperanza Ling) is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. She was created by Louise Simonson and Pasqual Ferry and first appeared in Warlock #1 (October 1999).
Hope is a Cuban mutant with the power to transmute inorganic matter. At a young age, she is exposed to the transmode virus during an encounter with the Phalanx and becomes a carrier of the virus without being affected by it. She is later imprisoned by the United States government as part of Project Mainspring, along with a transmode-infected monkey, Chi-Chee. Hope is freed by Warlock and allies with him in search of a cure.

Hornet

Phineas Horton

Professor Phineas Thomas Horton is a character appearing in American comic books published by Timely Comics, predecessor company of Marvel Comics. He first appeared in Marvel Comics #1 (September 1939) and was created by Carl Burgos.
Phineas Horton has been commonly depicted as the creator of the original Human Torch and stepfather of Frankie Raye.

Horus

Bailey Hoskins

Bailey Hoskins is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. He first appeared in X-Men: The Worst X-Man Ever #1 (January, 2016) and was created by  Max Bemis and Michael Walsh.
Bailey Hoskins is a young mutant from Earth-61403, with the ability to detonate his own body, killing himself in the process with no means to reconstitute himself. He is the star of X-Men: The Worst X-Man Ever, a 2016 five-issue mini-series, where he joins the Xavier Institute after his parents death, but fails to find his place among his peers. He befriends a fellow mutant Miranda, with the ability to vastly alter reality. Bailey uses his power in the future to kill a fellow mutant that went mad with power and took over the world, but reality was rewritten by Miranda.

Bailey Hoskins is noted for his "useless" mutant power.

Hoss

Hoss is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. He first appeared in Ghost Rider (vol. 5) #1 (November 2005) and was created by writer Garth Ennis and artist Clayton Crain.
Hoss is a demon, an enemy and occasional ally of the Ghost Rider. Hoss has been described as "one of Hell's most able tracker-scouts".

Howard the Duck
John Howard
John Howard is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics.

Earth-1610 version
The Ultimate Marvel version is the President of the United States who was previously the Secretary of Energy. The character, created by Jonathan Hickman, Sam Humphries, and Luke Ross, first appeared in Ultimate Comics: Ultimates #10 (May 2012). Howard reluctantly worked with the Ultimates as he struggled to keep America stable involving the Maker, Modi and civil war until he is removed from power due to blackmail caused his executive authority revoked.

John Howard in other media
An original incarnation of John Howard appears in Insomniac Games' Marvel's Spider-Man series, voiced by Dave Fennoy.

George Howe
H'rpra
H'rpra is a character appearing within American comic books involving Marvel Comics. The character, created by Roy Thomas, Dan Thomas and David Ross, first appeared in Avengers West Coast #91 (December 1992).
H'rpra was a Skrull who posed as Mockingbird.

Hrimhari
Hss. Marvel
Hss. Marvel is an anthropomorphic rattlesnake and animal version of Ms. Marvel.

Hub
Hub is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. She was created by Chris Claremont and Aaron Lopresti and made her first appearance in Excalibur (vol. 3) #1 (May, 2004).
Hub was a mutant survivor of the Genoshan massacre with the power of teleporting herself and others long distances. After the massacre, she allied herself with Unus the Untouchable and his gang. She would later ally herself with the Genoshan Excalibur team. M-Day would cause Hub to lose her powers, but she regained them due to Quicksilver using Terrigen crystals on her and other Genoshan mutants who lost their powers. Her powers soon went out of control and she was given medical care before again losing her powers.

Heather Hudson

Jimmy Hudson
Hugin and Munin
Hulk
The Hulk name was used by several characters appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics.

Bruce Banner
Rick Jones
Rick Jones was once exposed to the Nutrient Bath that fused Hulk and Banner back to one body and became a version of Hulk. He was cured of this form when Samuel Sterns drained the gamma radiation from Rick in order to become Leader again.

Amadeus Cho
Amadeus Cho used a device to siphon Hulk's gamma radiation and became his own version of Hulk.

Hulk-Bunny
Hulk-Bunny is a rabbit version of the Hulk from Earth-8311.

Hulk 2099
Hulk Robot
The Hulk Robot is the name of several characters appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics.

Military's Hulk Robot

The first Hulk Robot was a simulacrum created by the scientists at Gamma Base that was used to test the value of the Iceberg Rocket that General Thunderbolt Ross had his scientists create.

A later model of the Hulk Robot was operated by a remote that is worn by an individual at a safe distance. During the time he was cured of his gamma-radiation condition, Bruce Banner uses the robot to battle the Leader during his takeover of Gamma Base. The Hulk Robot is destroyed, generating feedback that nearly kills Banner.

Another version of the military's Hulk Robot came into the possession of the magician Kropotkin the Great during one of his visits to Gamma Base.

Second Hulk Robot

Rusty and Arthur are two Maryland Institute of Technology students who constructed a Hulk robot to be the mascot for their school's all-star game, but Dr. Timothy Ryan considered it dangerous and would not allow it. It was brought to life by cosmic energies released by the Eternals from Olympia when they emerged from the Uni-Mind. The energies granted the Hulk Robot sentience and increased its strength to rival the Hulk. It broke out of the lab and went on a rampage. When the National Guard couldn't stop the Hulk Robot, three Eternals members (Ikaris, Makkari, and Sersi) were called in. When the robot attacks Zuras, it is exposed to cosmic energy and rendered inert.

Later on, Doctor Doom finds the Hulk Robot and rebuilds it to serve him. He sends the robot to fight the Thing, who tears it apart.

During the Acts of Vengeance event, the Jester rebuilds the Hulk robot, who joins the Assembly of Evil. During the Avengers' press conference, the Hulk Robot attacks She-Hulk until Wasp attacks the Jester's remote control, causing the Hulk Robot to go haywire. She-Hulk destroys the robot by flinging it into an energy blast fired by Fenris.

During the Fall of the Hulks storyline, Galactus' Cosmos Automaton influences Mad Thinker into creating a new Hulk robot. Red Hulk and A-Bomb consider destroying the robot, but it activates after absorbing Red Hulk's energy. The group Intelligencia obtains the Hulk Robot and uses it to attack former member Doctor Doom.

Hulkette

Hulkette is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. She was originally created for a non-canon variant cover in Sensational She-Hulk (2023), which envisioned her as a forgotten sidekick of She-Hulk. Hulkette made her canon debut in Spider-Boy #13 (2024).

Hulkette appeared as one of several superhumans who are invited to compete in the Challenge of the Jade Dragon before Spider-Boy and Daredevil steal the invitational tickets of Hulkette and her mentor Enormo.

Hulkette was among the young superheroes who aided the New Champions against an army of zombie trolls.

Hulkette was among the superheroes who aided Spider-Boy in fighting Balloon Man and his henchmen.

Hulkling

Human Cannonball
Human Fly
Human Top
Human Top is the name of several characters appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics.

Bruce Bravelle

The Human Top (or just the Top) is a Golden Age superhero appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. The character appeared in two stories published by Timely Comics (the predecessor of Marvel Comics) in 1940 and 1942, and not since then. His real name is Bruce Bravelle. He is called "the Human Top" in the story titles but just "the Top" within the body of the stories.

Bravelle appeared in a ten-page backstory ("The Origin of the Human Top") in the first (and only) edition of Red Raven Comics, cover-dated August 1940, with script and artwork by Dick Briefer.

Bravelle's second appearance was in the backstory "The Red Terror" in Tough Kid Squad, cover-dated March 1942.

Bruce Bravelle was a test subject for a scientist who was trying to find a way to nourish the human body with electrical currents instead of food. In the middle of one of the tests, a bolt of lightning struck the castle in which the experiment was being conducted, causing an opposing magnetic flow and giving Bravelle the ability to spin around at superhuman speed when he crosses his wrists or is exposed to electricity. He can fly, drill his way through walls, and deflect bullets. He can operate underwater and travel at a speed of up to 250 miles per hour (400 km/h). His bullet-deflecting and wall-drilling powers are created by the intense whirlwind which he generates when spinning.

In his first adventure (published in 1940), the Top thwarts a bank robbery and is accused of being a thief when the bank manager personally keeps the returned money, but ultimately exposes the manager.

In his second adventure (published in 1942), the Top fought and defeated a sinister criminal mastermind called the Red Terror. The Red Terror and his goons derail and rob a train and escape in a zeppelin. The Top tracks them to their hideout in an abandoned mine and kills them all as they attempt to escape.

David Cannon

David Mitchell

David "Davy" Mitchell was a hero during World War II, and member of Kid Commandos. He had the power to spin like a top at super-speed.

During World War II, teenagers David "Davy" Mitchell and Gwenny Lou Sabuki, were present at a stateside battle in which sidekicks Bucky (Bucky Barnes) and Toro (Thomas Raymond) of the superhero team the Invaders fought the supervillain Agent Axis. During the battle, one of Gwenny's father's inventions accidentally gave Gwenny and Davy superhuman powers. She became Golden Girl, and he the Human Top. The four youthful heroes defeated Agent Axis, and later formed the Kid Commandos, who were allied with the adult Invaders.

The Kid Commandos even fought the Invaders, when they disagreed with the military's use of a Tsunami Bomb, which would have caused too much collateral damage. The bomb was never used, when the Invaders saw the testing site was populated with civilians.

After the war, he was a member of the Penance Council and V-Battalion.

His son, as Twister, had tried using mechanical means to simulate the powers of the Human Top, but eventually decided to serve the V-Battalion in a scientific capacity. Davy is also the grandfather of Topspin.

In his later years as seen during the "Last Days" part of the Secret Wars storyline, Davy moved into Valhalla Villas, a retirement community for Golden Age heroes and villains that is located in Miami. He and the rest of the retirees were temporarily de-aged and went back into action one last time before the collision between Earth-616 and Earth-1610.

Human Torch

Human Torch is the name of several characters appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics.

Jim Hammond
Johnny Storm
Relur
The Marvel 2099 reality had an Atlantean Human Torch named Relur.

Earth-906943 Relur
On Earth-906943, Relur is an Atlantean who fled to the surface world upon developing pyrokinesis and became the Atlantean version of Human Torch. He and Spider-Man 2099 were captured in the Arena Cell and worked together to get out.

Earth-2099 Relur
In the unified 2099 reality of Earth-2099, Relur was a member of the 2099 version of the Avengers. He was killed by the Masters of Evil.

Humbug

Hummingbird

Hump

Hump is a fictional mutant in the Marvel Comics Universe. His first appearance was in New Mutants #91 (July 1990).

Hump and his brother Brute were Morlocks with identical mutations who worked for Masque and accompanied him to confront Sabretooth but failed to kill him. They also tried to capture Feral but she escaped. When they tried to regain Feral from the New Mutants, Cable shot Brute dead causing Hump and Masque to take their leave.

Hump was with his revived brother when he and the Morlocks attacked the Reavers in Madripoor.

In Dark X-Men (vol. 2), Hump and Brute are among the Morlocks killed by an Orchis-controlled Archangel after the fall of Krakoa.

Humus Sapien

Amber Hunt

Amber Hunt is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. The character, created by Steve Gerber and R.R. Phipps, first appeared in Malibu Comics' Exiles #1 (August 1993).
Within the context of the stories, Hunt was an average American teenager in the Ultraverse before being exposed to the alien Theta Virus, which gave her pyrokinesis. Under the alias En Flame, she has been a team member of the Exiles and Ultraforce.

Huntara

Hunter

The Hunter (Nina Smith) is a minor character within Marvel Comics. The character, created by Fiona Avery and Mark Brooks, first appeared in Amazing Fantasy (vol. 2) #3 (October 2004).

She is Anya Corazon's critically insensitive rival and Miguel Legar's girlfriend. Nina is a member of the Spider Society / WebCorps who has fought the Sisterhood of the Wasp.

Nina later becomes the true receptacle of Araña's exoskeleton, allowing her to be the Spider Society's Hunter.

Hunter in other media

A variation of the character renamed Maria Corazon appears in the Spider-Man episode "Generations", voiced by Valenzia Algarin. An amalgamation of Nina Smith, Maria Vasquez, and Lynn Sakura, this version is Anya Corazon's scientifically minded stepsister who is studying in South America for her Ph.D.

Henrietta Hunter

Stevie Hunter

Hunter in Darkness
Hunter in Darkness is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. He first appearing in Wolverine (vol. 2) #34 (December 1990).

Hunter in Darkness is a humanoid, wolf-like being is animalistic though somewhat intelligent, alternating between mindless aggression and calculated hunting behaviors, even at one point seemingly forming an "alliance" with Elsie-Dee, Albert, and Wolverine. Among the Blackfoot in Canada, the Hunter is known as a boogeyman and the subject of legends. Wolverine first encountered the creature in the Canadian wilderness after escaping from the Weapon X project in a mostly feral state, at which point Wolverine freed the Hunter from a bear trap. Wolverine reencountered the Hunter years later. The Hunter was at one point captured and put on display in New York City, but it later escaped and returned to Canada.

Huntsman

Huntsman is the name of two characters appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics.

Employee of Zeus
Weapon XII
Hurricane
Husk
Faiza Hussain
Hussar
Hussar is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. The character, created by Chris Claremont and John Byrne, first appeared in The Uncanny X-Men #137 (September 1980).

Hussar is a warrior serving in the Royal Elite of the Shi'ar Imperial Guard. She wields a whip that she uses to channel bioelectricity into her opponents to shock and paralyze.

Hussar in other media

Hussar makes non-speaking cameo appearances in X-Men: The Animated Series.

Hussar appears as a mini-boss in Marvel: Ultimate Alliance, voiced by April Stewart.

Ralph Hutchins

Ralph "Ralphie" Hutchins is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comcis.

Ralph Hutchins was a lab worker at UCLA. After receiving a sample of She-Hulk's blood, his boss uses it to make a superhero formula he injects Hutchins with. This turns Hutchins into a series of superhumans. Every time he is killed or beaten, he is resurrected as a new superhuman with new powers. His first transformation was called Brute, followed by Seeker, Radius, Torque and Earth-Lord. In the final issue of the series, he is turned into an incorporeal being and leaves Earth.

Hybrid

Hybrid is the name of two characters appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics.

Jimmy Marks
Scott Washington
Hydro-Man
Hydron
Hydron is the name of several characters appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics.

Elemental
Salem's Seven member

Hyperion
Hyperstorm
Hyperstorm (Jonathan Richards) is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. The character was created by Tom DeFalco, Paul Ryan, and Danny Bulanadi, and first appeared in Fantastic Four #406 (November 1995).
Hyperstorm is a mutant supervillain from an alternate future. The son of his reality's Franklin Richards and Rachel Summers, he possesses psionic powers and the ability to manipulate reality. He conquers most of his reality and attempts to extend his rule to other timelines.

Hypno-Hustler

Hypnotia

Hypnotia () is a character appearing in Marvel Comics. She is a servant of the Mandarin who can control the minds of others, and was originally created by Ron Friedman for the Iron Man animated series. Her first appearance in comics was in the series' tie-in comic (November 1994). Hypnotia is voiced by Linda Holdahl in the first season and Jennifer Darling in the second.
