In a Perfect World is an unreleased studio album by American rapper Kanye West. Media personality DJ Akademiks announced the album under the title WW3 during a live stream on April 2, 2025, a week after the track of the same name was released as a single on March 26. The album was soon renamed to Cuck, with the stylization CUKKK being considered during production.

Amid the surprise release of demos for his preceding album Bully the month prior, West caused controversy by making antisemitic statements, supporting Nazism, and posting offensive remarks—as well as revealing childhood incest involving his male cousin on his Twitter account. The latter remark tied into the album's second single, "Cousins", released on April 21. The third single, "Heil Hitler" (later renamed "Hallelujah"), was released on May 8 through West's Twitter in a now deleted tweet.

American rapper Dave Blunts, who first met West in February 2025, has been cited as the album's sole songwriter by multiple sources, including West himself. Blunts makes several uncredited guest appearances on the album through artificial intelligence-generated audio deepfakes of West's voice over his own, and contributes unedited vocals on the song "Bianca". Quadwoofer and Sheffmade, two producers who have heavily collaborated with Blunts, are the album's primary producers. Che Pope, Digital Nas, and Templecitygrounds also helped in producing the album, alongside West himself.

An unfinished version of the album was leaked in May 2025 following a charity crowdfunding campaign via Discord; the proceeds of the leak were donated to the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. West began to retract his antisemitic statements that same month, releasing censored versions of "WW3" and "Heil Hitler" to streaming services and renaming the album to In a Perfect World. By January 2026, West apologized for his antisemitic remarks and behavior, pledging to "accountability, treatment, and meaningful change".

Background and recording

Collaborations with Dave Blunts

In February 2025, Kanye West met Dave Blunts and they started working on an album together. According to West, he and Blunts would spend hours talking to each other, and Blunts would write three songs a day based off their conversations. Regarding the creation of album track "Cousins", Blunts recalled:"Cousins" was one of [my songs] that got picked. I really liked that song, because he had told me about the situation with him and his cousin, and I could tell that the song was very freeing for him when I made it. I believe that he chose me to write songs because I have a blunt approach to it, and that's the way that this song needed to be. I mean, it happened exactly like I said in the song, no double entendres. Just, like, "I gave him head."

On a June 2025 episode of the Dope As Usual podcast, Blunts further elaborated on his work for the album. According to him, West asked him to write the entirety of In a Perfect World only a day after they met, a meeting arranged by West's agent. Blunts stated that he usually spent 20–30 minutes on each reference track, but once rewrote a track upwards of twenty times at West's request. He based his lyrics off of phone calls he'd have with West (which he described as being "sporadic" in frequency) as well as tweets that West was making at the time. Blunts also published several of his reference tracks online while he was working on the album.

Blunts repeatedly denied that the lyrical content of In a Perfect World is antisemitic, describing the album as being "about one man going between hurt, betrayal and pain and he's putting that shit down..." On September 13, 2025, Blunts took to Instagram to announce that he was cutting ties with West and would no longer work on the album, urging him to "find God", and would later release several diss tracks aimed at West, where he alleged that West "groomed" him into writing the album's antisemitic lyrics.

The song "Diddy Free", originally featured on In a Perfect World, was reworked and released on Never Stop (2025), an extended play (EP) by Christian "King" Combs, which was executively produced by West.

Leak

On May 18, 2025, the album was leaked in its entirety after a $999 charity group buy for the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum via the messaging site Discord. The leaked album files contained derogatory messaging towards West in its media and metadata as a form of protest, including listing Blunts as the song artist instead of West, listing "AI" and "1945" as its genre and date respectively, and replacing the cover with a 1994 picture of West wearing an antifascist shirt with the title "Fuck Nazis" and a subtitle—"50 year old loser promoting fascism and hate speech"—overlaid onto it.

West acknowledged the leak on Twitter, clarifying that the song "Uncle" was no longer part of the album, and its lyrics were not related to his wife Censori. He stated the following regarding its leak through Twitter:"Somebody got a drive and threw it on YouTube and said this is CUCK
What I love about getting blocked on DSPs and having songs leaked and shows cancelled is...

It proves everything I'm saying and why I'm saying"

Promotion

Album rollout and singles

On March 6, West stated that his upcoming music would feature an "antisemitic sound". On March 16, he posted images of a Nazi swastika and the sig runes of the Schutzstaffel (SS), claiming them to be his "new album cover" and "new Sunday Service logo", respectively.

West first teased the song "WW3" on March 15 on his Twitter account. Prior to its release, Blunts and streamer Adin Ross had reacted to the song; the latter initially expressed negative feelings, but later seemed to enjoy the song when reacting to it on stream with rapper Kodak Black. West released "WW3" as a single on March 26. On March 30, DJ Akademiks held an interview in which West wore a black Ku Klux Klan-inspired outfit and made further controversial remarks, including stating that he regrets having children with his ex-wife Kim Kardashian. He made negative remarks about various other celebrities, including Jay-Z, Beyoncé, Playboi Carti, Kendrick Lamar, Ty Dolla Sign, and the late Virgil Abloh. The following day, West released the music video to "WW3" on Twitter. The video contains a repurposed scene from the American television miniseries Roots alongside graphic sexual imagery featuring interracial sex and footage of a KKK gathering.

On April 2, DJ Akademiks announced that the album, initially titled WW3, would be released the next day, and shared the track listing. Akademiks also previewed the track "Bianca"; the lyrics of the track concern West's separation from his wife Bianca Censori, pleading with her to "come back". When the album failed to drop on April 3, West revealed the album cover, which depicts a male and female Klan member wearing white and red KKK-inspired outfits, respectively, posing in front of a stack of hay bales. The album cover is an edited version of the 2015 photo The wedding of two members of the KKK in a barn in rural America by Peter van Agtmael, who claimed that West's use of the photograph was unauthorized.

On April 21, West announced that he was changing the title of the album to Cuck (in popular culture, short for cuckold), which he said represented "[his] whole style". He released the music video for the second single called "Cousins" the same day in a tweet, with part of the text reading "This song is called COUSINS about my cousin that's locked in jail for life for killing a pregnant lady a few years after I told him we wouldn't 'look at dirty magazines together' anymore." The track contains lyrics discussing West's experience having an incestuous relationship with a male cousin as a child and his recreational use of nitrous oxide. The music video consists of low quality footage drawn from home media, TV commercials, and pornography.

On May 7, West stated on Twitter that he was uploading the third single called "Heil Hitler". On May 8, he released the music video for the single, featuring men draped in animal skins singing the chorus, with the outro sampling a speech by Adolf Hitler. West subsequently released the song on SoundCloud and Scrybe. West then stated on May 9 that the song was "banned by all digital streaming platforms". An instrumental version titled "The Heil Symphony" was uploaded in its place on May 14.

Retractions and alterations

On May 20, "WW3" was removed from all streaming services, followed by West tweeting that he was "done with antisemitism" following a FaceTime call with his children on May 22. He asked God to "forgive me for the pain I've caused" and said that he forgave those who caused him pain. He later re-uploaded the song, with new black cover art and censoring of the words "Nazi", "Swastikas", "Hitler", "Antisemitic" and "Mein Kampf". "The Heil Symphony" was also taken down, later re-uploaded with black cover art and the updated name "Hit Symphony". On May 31, a song titled "Hallelujah" was uploaded to YouTube before being added to streaming services. The song itself, which is an edited version of "Heil Hitler", censored the phrase "Heil Hitler" and replaced it with "Hallelujah", with "all my niggas Nazis" being changed to "all my niggas got me". The only other censored word is "Nazi" during the line "So I became a Nazi yeah, bitch I'm the villain".

On June 22, West posted to X that he was thinking about changing the album's name from "CUKKK" to "IN A PERFECT WORLD". He later posted "IN A PERFECT WORLD", implying it as the new title for the album. Blunts also updated the caption of an image of him and West on Instagram, changing it from "CUCKS" to "IN A PERFECT WORLD" to reflect the name change. In an interview with VladTV, Blunts claimed that West had moved on from antisemitic rhetoric, stating that, "he's not on that anymore, he's doing better now."

West would later play "Gas Chambers", also known as "All the Love", in a rehearsal a day prior to his concert in Shanghai on July 11, but he did not play the song during the concert. The album tracks "WW3" and "Hallelujah" were played at the concert on July 12 without West's approval or knowledge according to a post made by his team on Xiaohongshu, along with songs from his upcoming album Bully and his song with YoungBoy Never Broke Again, "Alive" (2025).

Since then, on November 17, "WW3," "Cousins", and "Heil Hitler", along with their alternate versions "Hallelujah" and "Hit Symphony", were removed from all streaming services following his apology to Rabbi Yoshiyahu Yosef Pinto. The song "Gas Chambers" was repurposed for Bully under it's alternate title "All The Love", appearing in the tracklist for that album. In January 2026, West published an open letter in The Wall Street Journal in which he apologized for his antisemitic remarks and behavior, stating his outbursts stemmed from manic episodes in which he "gravitated toward the most destructive symbol I could find, the swastika", as he refused to accept his bipolar disorder diagnosis. West said he was "deeply mortified by [his] actions" and pledged to "accountability, treatment, and meaningful change".

Track listing

All songs are reportedly written by Dave Blunts. This track list refers to the May 18, 2025 leak.
