It's the Most Terrible Time of the Year is an AI-generated television commercial done for McDonald's Netherlands by TBWA\Neboko and The Sweetshop released on 6 December 2025 before it was pulled out four days later due to negative reception over its use of generative artificial intelligence and its story.

Plot

In a bleak snowy day, various people in the city experiences different kinds of mishaps during the Christmas season, including Santa Claus who got stuck in traffic. A man finds refuge in a McDonald's outlet. A Christmas choir finishes singing the jingle "It's the Most Terrible Time of the Year" with the call to action to "hide out in McDonald's till January's here".

Campaign

It's the Most Terrible Time of the Year is a 45-second television commercial made by Dutch agency TBWA\Neboko with involvement of United States-based film production studio The Sweetshop.

The advertisement was produced heavily with generative artificial intelligence (AI) following the trend set by other brands such as Coca-Cola and Toys "R" Us.

McDonald's Netherlands, the client, released a statement that the commercial was meant to depict the "the stressful moments during the holidays in the Netherlands". The commercial also used Andy Williams's "It's the Most Wonderful Time of the Year" with lyrics changed to fit with the concept of the advertisement.

According to The Sweetshop, the production of the advertisement took "seven weeks". It also added that much effort was put on the commercial compared to the traditional process. Ten people of its in-house AI engine The Gardening Club worked on the project.

Los Angeles-based directors Mark Potoka and Matt Spicer were initially credited to be involved in the film but they resigned due to being sidelined from the production process.

Reception

The advertisement was released on McDondald's Netherlands' YouTube channel on 6 December 2025. It had negative reception over the use of generative AI and the "cynical" concept of the work's story. The video was privated on 9 December 2025.

The Sweetshop in a statement that the production of the advertisement took human effort.

McDonald's Netherlands while stating the original intent of the commercial released a statement after its pullout that for many of its customers that the Christmas season is the "most wonderful time of the year".
