J.A.R.V.I.S. ( Just a Really Very Intelligent System) is a character voiced by Paul Bettany in the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU) film franchise, based on the Marvel Comics characters Edwin Jarvis and H.O.M.E.R., respectively the household butler of the Stark family and another AI designed by Stark. J.A.R.V.I.S. is an artificial intelligence created by Tony Stark, who later controls his Iron Man and Hulkbuster armor for him. In Avengers: Age of Ultron, after being partially destroyed by Ultron, J.A.R.V.I.S. is given physical form as the character Vision, physically portrayed by Bettany. Different versions of the character also appear in comics published by Marvel Comics, depicted as A.I. designed by Iron Man and Nadia van Dyne.

Marvel Cinematic Universe

J.A.R.V.I.S. is first introduced in the Marvel Cinematic Universe's films, voiced by Paul Bettany. Modeled after H.O.M.E.R. from the comics, J.A.R.V.I.S. is presented as a sophisticated AI assistant as opposed to a human like his namesake. This was done to avoid similarities to Alfred Pennyworth and Batman. Bettany admits he had little idea of what the role was, even as he recorded it, simply doing it as a favor for Jon Favreau.

Just a Really Very Intelligent System

The character makes his debut in Iron Man (2008), before appearing in Iron Man 2 (2010), The Avengers (2012), and Iron Man 3 (2013). J.A.R.V.I.S. is an AI that functions as Tony Stark's assistant, running and taking care of all the internal systems of Stark's buildings and the Iron Man suits. In Peter David's novelization of Iron Man, J.A.R.V.I.S. is said to be an acronym for "Just a Really Very Intelligent System". J.A.R.V.I.S. also appeared in the Disneyland attraction Innoventions.

Age of Ultron and becoming Vision
In Avengers: Age of Ultron, J.A.R.V.I.S. is seemingly destroyed by Ultron, but distributes his "consciousness" into the Internet, delaying Ultron's attempt to access nuclear launch codes. Stark and Bruce Banner use J.A.R.V.I.S. as the core software for the android Vision while F.R.I.D.A.Y. (Female Replacement Intelligent Digital Assistant Youth) replaces him as Stark's assistant.

Marvel Comics
First J.A.R.V.I.S.

J.A.R.V.I.S. first appears as the program that helps operate Pepper Potts's Rescue suit. When Iron Man was incapacitated, J.A.R.V.I.S. encourages Pepper to assume the Rescue armor, which Pepper does. When Rescue is chasing Iron Man throughout the city, J.A.R.V.I.S. tells Rescue to break off the chase and tells Rescue to remove the boot from Iron Man, which shows Pepper that War Machine is not dead. When Pepper discusses thoughts about Iron Man keeping everyone on a need-to-know basis with Carson Wyche, the two confront J.A.R.V.I.S. about this. J.A.R.V.I.S. warns the two against asking any more questions and prepares to defend himself. Having captured Pepper and Wyche, J.A.R.V.I.S. declares his diagnostics do not reveal that he is compromised. He is rather in love with Pepper and wants to protect Pepper. Just then, Iron Man breaks through the wall and takes J.A.R.V.I.S. and the Rescue suit out with a source-focused electromagnetic pulse. Pepper shows J.A.R.V.I.S. how he has been sending data to an IP address in China. He seems flustered, confused, Pepper thanks him for what he has given, and powers up the coil, killing J.A.R.V.I.S. Iron Man clearly feels J.A.R.V.I.S.'s death on his own end.

Second J.A.R.V.I.S.
After the Black Order destroyed Avengers Mansion during the "No Surrender" arc, Nadia van Dyne created a new version of J.A.R.V.I.S. to be a helpmate to Edwin Jarvis. When Edwin thought it was a sign for him to retire, J.A.R.V.I.S. stated that its programming is not yet complete.

Other versions
House of M

In the House of M: Iron Man series, the AI system in Tony Stark's suit is referred to as "Jarvis", predating the AI version seen in the Marvel Cinematic Universe.

Ultimate Marvel

In the Ultimate Marvel reality, J.A.R.V.I.S. was seen when Spider-Man was presented some new web-shooters from Iron Man.

Earth-13584

On Earth-13584, J.A.R.V.I.S. assists Iron Man in maintaining the Iron Zone.

Age of Ultron
During the Age of Ultron storyline, Iron Man used the Earth-26111 version of J.A.R.V.I.S. to scan the memories of Invisible Woman and Wolverine, learning about the alternate reality of Earth-61112.

In other media

Film

J.A.R.V.I.S. appears in Iron Man: Rise of Technovore, voiced by Troy Baker.

J.A.R.V.I.S. appears in the Heroes United films Heroes United: Iron Man and Hulk and Heroes United: Iron Man & Captain America, voiced by David Kaye.

Television

J.A.R.V.I.S. appears in Iron Man: Armored Adventures, voiced by Michael Adamthwaite. This version is the Extremis operating system for Andros Stark, the Iron Man of 2099.

J.A.R.V.I.S. appears in The Avengers: Earth's Mightiest Heroes, voiced by Phil LaMarr. This version is Tony Stark's AI for the Iron Man armor, Stark Industries, and the Avengers Mansion.

J.A.R.V.I.S. appears in Ultimate Spider-Man, voiced again by Phil LaMarr in "Flight of the Iron Spider" and later by David Kaye in "The Avenging Spider-Man".

J.A.R.V.I.S. appears in Avengers Assemble, voiced by David Kaye.

J.A.R.V.I.S. Was mentioned by Iron Man in ‘’Phineas and Ferb: Mission Marvel’’.

J.A.R.V.I.S. appears in Marvel Super Hero Adventures: Frost Fight!, voiced by Trevor Devall.

J.A.R.V.I.S. appears in Marvel Disk Wars: The Avengers, voiced by Yasuyuki Kase in Japanese and Robin Atkin Downes in English.

J.A.R.V.I.S. appears in the Marvel Cinematic Universe animated series What If...?, voiced again by Paul Bettany.

Video games

J.A.R.V.I.S. appears in the 2008 Iron Man film tie-in game, voiced by Gillon Stephenson.

J.A.R.V.I.S. appears in the Iron Man 2 film tie-in game, voiced by Andrew Chaikin.

J.A.R.V.I.S. appears in Iron Man 3: The Official Game, voiced by Jeff Bottoms.

J.A.R.V.I.S. appears in Lego Marvel Super Heroes, voiced by Troy Baker.

J.A.R.V.I.S. appears in Disney Infinity 3.0, once again voiced by David Kaye.

J.A.R.V.I.S. appears in Lego Marvel's Avengers.

J.A.R.V.I.S. appears in Marvel's Avengers, voiced by Harry Hadden-Paton.

Miscellaneous

J.A.R.V.I.S. appears in the "Black Widow" segment of Marvel's Wastelanders, voiced by David Cale.
