This is a list of genetic algorithm (GA) applications.

Natural Sciences, Mathematics and Computer Science
Bayesian inference links to particle methods in Bayesian statistics and hidden Markov chain models
Artificial creativity

Chemical kinetics (gas and solid phases)

Calculation of bound states and local-density approximations

Code-breaking, using the GA to search large solution spaces of ciphers for the one correct decryption.

Computer architecture: using GA to find out weak links in approximate computing such as lookahead.

Configuration applications, particularly physics applications of optimal molecule configurations for particular systems like C60 (buckyballs)
Construction of facial composites of suspects by eyewitnesses in forensic science.

Data Center/Server Farm.

Distributed computer network topologies
Electronic circuit design, known as evolvable hardware
Evolutionary image processing
Feature selection for Machine Learning
Feynman-Kac models
File allocation for a distributed system
Filtering and signal processing
Finding hardware bugs.
Game theory equilibrium resolution
Genetic Algorithm for Rule Set Production
Scheduling applications, including job-shop scheduling and scheduling in printed circuit board assembly. The objective being to schedule jobs in a sequence-dependent or non-sequence-dependent setup environment in order to maximize the volume of production while minimizing penalties such as tardiness. Satellite communication scheduling for the NASA Deep Space Network was shown to benefit from genetic algorithms.
Learning robot behavior using genetic algorithms

Image processing: Dense pixel matching

Learning fuzzy rule base using genetic algorithms

Molecular structure optimization (chemistry)

Optimisation of data compression systems, for example using wavelets.

Power electronics design.
Traveling salesman problem and its applications

Stopping propagations, i.e. deciding how to cut edges in a graph so that some infectious condition (e.g. a disease, fire, computer virus, etc.) stops its spread. A bi-level genetic algorithm (i.e. a genetic algorithm where the fitness of each individual is calculated by running another genetic algorithm) was used due to the ΣP2-completeness of the problem.

Earth Sciences

Climatology: Estimation of heat flux between the atmosphere and sea ice

Climatology: Modelling global temperature changes
Design of water resource systems
Groundwater monitoring networks

Finance and Economics
Financial mathematics
Real options valuation
Portfolio optimization
Genetic algorithm in economics
Representing rational agents in economic models such as the cobweb model
the same, in Agent-based computational economics generally, and in artificial financial markets

Social Sciences

Design of anti-terrorism systems

Linguistic analysis, including grammar induction and other aspects of Natural language processing (NLP) such as word-sense disambiguation.

Finding the optimum subset of questions from a candidate pool of questions in psychological test design

Industry, Management and Engineering

Audio watermark insertion/detection

Airlines revenue management
Automated design of mechatronic systems using bond graphs and genetic programming (NSF)
Automated design of industrial equipment using catalogs of exemplar lever patterns
Automated design, including research on composite material design and multi-objective design of automotive components for crashworthiness, weight savings, and other characteristics
Automated planning of structural inspection
Container loading optimization
Control engineering,
Marketing mix analysis
Mechanical engineering
Mobile communications infrastructure optimization.
Plant floor layout
Pop music record production
Quality control
Sorting network
Timetabling problems, such as designing a non-conflicting class timetable for a large university
Vehicle routing problem
Optimal bearing placement
Computer-automated design

Biological Sciences and Bioinformatics
Bioinformatics Multiple Sequence Alignment
Bioinformatics: RNA structure prediction
Bioinformatics: Motif Discovery

Biology and computational chemistry

Building phylogenetic trees.

Gene expression profiling analysis.

Medicine: Clinical decision support in ophthalmology and oncology
Computational Neuroscience: finding values for the maximal conductances of ion channels in biophysically detailed neuron models
Protein folding and protein/ligand docking
Selection of optimal mathematical model to describe biological systems

Operon prediction.

General Applications
Neural Networks; particularly recurrent neural networks
Training artificial neural networks when pre-classified training examples are not readily obtainable (neuroevolution)

Physics
Optimization of beam dynamics in accelerator physics.
Design of particle accelerator beamlines

Other Applications
Clustering, using genetic algorithms to optimize a wide range of different fit-functions.
Multidimensional systems
Multimodal Optimization
Multiple criteria production scheduling
Multiple population topologies and interchange methodologies
Mutation testing
Parallelization of GAs/GPs including use of hierarchical decomposition of problem domains and design spaces nesting of irregular shapes using feature matching and GAs.
Rare event analysis
Solving the machine-component grouping problem required for cellular manufacturing systems
Stochastic optimization
Tactical asset allocation and international equity strategies
Wireless sensor/ad-hoc networks.
