Love Phobia (Korean: 러브포비아) is an upcoming South Korean romantic comedy sci-fi television series written by Lee Se-ryeong and directed by Wang Hye-ryeong. The series centers on Yoon Bi-a (Yeonwoo), a CEO who's swapped human connection for AI comfort, and Han Seon-ho (Kim Hyun-jin) a hopelessly romantic novelist, as mysterious secrets unravel around them. It also stars Jo Yun-seo, Choi Byung-chan, and Im Ji-eun. It will be released on U+ Mobile TV and Lifetime on February 19, 2026, at 23:00 (KST).

Synopsis

Yoon Bi-a, the CEO of the AI dating app "It's You", is haunted by a trauma that limits her connections to under an hour. Trapped in her own emotional storm, she pours her energy into developing a generative AI dating app with her trusted friend Jae-hee by her side. Han Seon-ho, South Korea's hottest author, sells out every book launch, but behind his idol-like charm lies a hidden pain. Bi-a's arrival sparks a life-altering crisis, leading Seon-ho to join "It's You" and flip his world upside down.

Cast and characters
Main
Yeonwoo as Yoon Bi-a
Kim Hyun-jin as Han Seon-ho
Jo Yun-seo as Seol Jae-hee
Bi-a's best friend.
Choi Byung-chan as Han Baek-ho
Seon-ho's brother, who is the head of HAN Agency.
Im Ji-eun as Yang Sun-ae
Bi-a's mother.

Supporting
Lee Ji-hae as Song Ji-young
Kim Ki-nam as Kim Kyung-tae
Han Kyu-min as Kang San
Hwang Ha-jung as Hong Ju-yeon
Kim So-ha as Shin Yoo-kyung

Production and release

Wang Hye-ryeong, who helmed Season of Blossom (2022) and Let Me Off the Earth (2020–2021), was attached to direct, and the screenplay is written by Lee Se-ryeong, who wrote Please, Summer (2020). The production is handled by WeMad.

In April 2025, Kim Hyun-jin, Yeonwoo, Jo Yun-seo, and Choi Byung-chan were confirmed to lead the series. The next month, Im Ji-eun, Lee Ji-hae, Kim Ki-nam, Han Kyu-min, Hwang Ha-jung, and Kim So-ha were confirmed to appear as the supporting role.

The release of Love Phobia was originally scheduled to premiere on U+ Mobile TV in June 2025, but was postponed. By January 2026, the series was confirmed to premiere on U+ Mobile TV and Lifetime on February 19, 2026, at 23:00 (KST).
