Luca Longo is an Italian computer scientist specializing in Explainable artificial intelligence, Deep Learning and Argumentation theory with research in the areas of Human performance modeling. As the founder and general chair of the World Conference on Explainable artificial intelligence, he performs fundamental research in the area of computational models of Cognitive Load and is the editor of books and journals with Springer Publishing  and Frontiers Media .

He is a public speaker disseminating technical knowledge to the wider public   and contributing to the non-profit organization TED (conference) "ideas worth spreading" .

Luca is the recipient of the 2023 "AI Person of the Year" award, organised by AI Ireland, a non-profit organisation focused on promoting Artificial intelligence in Ireland. He is also the 2016  and 2021 winner of the Teaching Hero Award in Ireland by the National Forum for Teaching and Learning, inspiring students by creating motivating and stimulating learning environments that support the acquisition of skills and the formation of knowledge applicable in practical contexts through the mastering of the Community of inquiry  in Higher education. Longo is also an educator, striving to empower Education with the use of technology and Artificial Intelligence . These distinctions have led to his conferral of the "Italiani nel mondo" award from Associazioni Sportive Sociali Italiane it:Associazioni sportive sociali italiane in 2024 .

Longo is a professor at the University College Cork in Ireland and the founder of the first Centre of Explainable Artificial Intelligence in Ireland.

He is currently leading the Artificial Intelligence and Cognitive Load research labs  at the University College Cork aimed at expanding the boundaries of Artificial Intelligence and bridging the gap between machines and humans. His approach to doctoral supervision has led to a nomination for the award 'Outstanding Research Supervisor of the Year' (2021), widely recognised as the 'Oscars of higher education' organised by the Times Higher Education, one of the leading world magazine of higher education.

Longo is originally from Varese where he earned a bachelor's and master's degree in Computer Science from the University of Insubria. He continued with a master in Health informatics, one in Statistics, and a doctorate in Artificial Intelligence at Trinity College Dublin.

He later joined the Technological University Dublin where he obtained two masters in Pedagogy, one in Scholarship of teaching and learning and one in Applied E-learning.
