Magic Kombat is a 1995 Philippine sci-fi fantasy comedy film written and directed by Junn Cabreira. The film stars Smokey Manaloto and Eric Fructuoso. The film centers around Mario and Luigi as they are accidentally transported into a video game world and are forced to fight their way out of it. It was one of the entries in the 1995 Metro Manila Film Festival.

Many of the film's scenarios, sound effects and characters–including that of Mario and Luigi–were unauthorized parodies of Super Mario Bros., Street Fighter II and other video games popular in the Philippines during the 80s and 90s.

Plot

Working students Mario (Manaloto) and Luigi (Fructuoso), become recently-unemployed after an incident at a mall and struggle to make ends meet until they find employment as janitors and technicians at a school, where they get a chance to study.

When a video game character named Rio suddenly gets materialized into the real world during a gaming session by Mario on a stormy night, the Mario brothers along with their friend Diana set out to get Rio back to her home world, but things get complicated when Mario and Luigi are sucked into the video game realm instead of Rio. The two brothers are then forced to fight their way through each of the game's levels and are later aided by Rio who made her way back to her home realm. After a final encounter with supernatural creatures in a cave, Mario and Luigi use the gems they retrieved from their previous encounters, unlocking the door which leads them back to the real world.

Back in their old job as janitors, Mario and Luigi chance upon a student who bears a striking resemblance to Rio.

Cast
Smokey Manaloto as Mario
Eric Fructuoso as Luigi
Dandin Ranillo as Janitor
Beth Tamayo as Diana
Joanne Pascual as Rio
Sharmaine Suarez as Blanka
Ernie Ortega as Samurai Man
Aga Fazon as Gorilla
Jan Cassie Espolong as Goko
Cita Astals as School Dean
Jaime Fabregas as Asst. Dean
Francis Enriquez as Student
Nonong de Andres as Albularyo
Solita Carreon as Recruiter
Cris Daluz as Uncle Teong

Awards
