The Manhunters are a fictional race of extraterrestrial robots that appear in titles published by DC Comics.

Publication history
The broader history behind the alien robot species covered in this article was introduced in Justice League of America #140 (March 1977), in a story by Steve Englehart and Dick Dillin.

Fictional character biography
Interstellar police
The Manhunters are the first attempt of the Guardians of the Universe to create an interstellar police force that could combat evil all over the cosmos. Their name and much of their code of behavior is modeled by the Guardians of the Universe on the Manhunters of Ma'aleca'andra (Mars) millions of years ago. For thousands of years, they serve the Guardians well. As the Manhunters become more intelligent and self-aware, they begin to resent the limitations placed upon them by the Guardians; in their eyes, justice is less important than the hunting and punishment of those they deem wicked.

Exile
Eventually, the robots conspire to rebel against their masters, but the Guardians defeat and destroy most of them. Those who survived hide away on many planets, slowly rebuilding their forces and spreading their beliefs to others. Since then, the overriding goal of the Manhunters has been to take revenge on the Guardians, as well as on their replacements, the Green Lantern Corps.
The Manhunters infiltrate and liberate many planets disguised as living beings and create a "Cult of the Manhunters" that trains others to be their minions. On Mars, the people of that world start a group of Martian Manhunters based on the lessons of preserving justice taught unto them by the Manhunters and even erect a temple based on the appearance of their inspiration. On Earth, most of the Manhunters' agents are unaware that their masters are robots, or that their real purposes are not noble. Some of these agents became superheroes also known as Manhunters and wear red and blue costumes patterned after the Manhunters themselves.

Millennium
Years later, it is revealed that the Manhunters not only still exist, but have infiltrated the lives of most superheroes with their agents. They even manage to infiltrate the Olympian Gods, one of their number posing as the goat god Pan, as shown during the Challenge of the Gods storyline. They reveal themselves when a Guardian and a member of the Zamarons try to evolve some humans into becoming the next Guardians of the Universe, during what becomes known as the Millennium crisis. On this occasion, there is a massive counterstrike operation by the heroes against the Manhunters, and it seems that the Grandmaster has finally been destroyed, along with their hidden home planet. Former Privateer Mark Shaw readopts his identity as Manhunter in the wake of the battle, seeking to redeem both the name and himself.

Post-Emerald Twilight
Kyle Rayner encounters the Manhunters not long after Hal Jordan's destruction of the Guardians and the Central Power Battery on Oa. The first of the androids encounters a still inexperienced Kyle and is almost able to defeat him using brute force until Kyle uses his wits to outsmart and destroy it. The next time, multiple Manhunters appear. They are all sentient individuals, upgraded by a passing alien ship with technology onboard that gives them a hive consciousness. They capture Kyle in an attempt to use his last remaining Green Lantern ring for their purposes. They fail and Kyle manages to escape.

Sector 3601
When the Manhunters are replaced by the Green Lantern Corps, they retreat to Biot, their homeworld in Sector 3601, an uncharted area of space incapable of sustaining organic life. Hank Henshaw, the Cyborg Superman, comes to Biot and becomes the Manhunters' new Grandmaster. He uses his mastery over machinery and Kryptonian technology to upgrade the Manhunters with organic enhancements, resulting in behavioral developments such as emotions. They seem to have rebuilt the first Central Power Battery originally destroyed by Hal Jordan (under the influence of Parallax). Henshaw decides not to interfere in the reformation of the Green Lantern Corps after an encounter between a Manhunter and Green Lanterns Hal Jordan and Guy Gardner.

Sinestro Corps
The Manhunters later resurface as part of the Sinestro Corps. Some of them carry miniature yellow Power Batteries inside them which are used by the Sinestro Corps members to charge their yellow power rings while others still carry the green ones for taking powers from the Green Lanterns' rings.

Secret Origin
In the Green Lantern: Secret Origin storylines (which revises Hal Jordan's beginnings), it is revealed that the Manhunters suffered a programming glitch that caused them to wipe out all life in space sector 666, believing it to be evil. It is this event that gives rise to the Five Inversions, the only survivors of the massacre, who vow to make the Guardians pay for what their creations had done.

Blackest Night
During the events of Blackest Night, it is revealed that Amanda Waller and King Faraday have a deactivated Manhunter in their possession, having recovered it from the Belle Reve swamp after the Millennium event (which the Suicide Squad had a hand in stopping). Waller sends the Manhunter to Belle Reve to assist the Secret Six and the Suicide Squad in their battle with members of the Black Lantern Corps. Waller uses a self-destruct mechanism to destroy the Manhunter, unleashing an explosion of Green Lantern energy that eradicates the Black Lanterns.

Brightest Day
It is revealed that the programming glitch the Manhunters suffered was caused by Krona to prove to the other Guardians of the Universe that there are flaws in an emotionless police force.

The New 52
During The New 52, while running from the Alpha Lanterns, John Stewart and Guy Gardner find dozens of deactivated Manhunters in the Guardian's Ring Foundry. They re-energize the robots using the Foundry essence to fend off the Alphas. However, during the fight, the Manhunters are accidentally fused into a massive bio-mechanic monster.

Highmaster
The Highmaster is the supreme Manhunter which appeared on Orinda in Justice League International #10. He resembles a gigantic yellow Manhunter and was destroyed by Hal Jordan and Superman.

Technology
Manhunter technology has been used in the creation of the OMAC drones. The Kryptonian technology was incorporated into the Manhunters by Hank Henshaw on Biot, which enabled them to use the Central Power Battery on Oa as a power source for the Manhunters.
Originally the Manhunters used special energy pistols which were charged by the Green Lanterns which they carried.

Other versions
The Manhunters appear in Star Trek/Green Lantern: The Spectrum War.
The Manhunters appear in Green Lantern: Earth One. These versions were created by the Guardians of Oa to replace the Corps, who they felt had become too independent.

In other media
Television
The Manhunters appear in the Justice League episode "In Blackest Night", with their leader voiced by James Remar. This version of the group were reprogrammed to perform other tasks due to being unable to understand morality, but secretly plotted revenge against the Guardians. They and Kanjar Ro frame Green Lantern John Stewart for the destruction of the planet Ajuris 4 and attempt to absorb the Central Battery's power, but are ultimately defeated by him.
The Manhunters appear in Green Lantern: The Animated Series, voiced by Josh Keaton. This version of the group seek to destroy all emotions, believing them to be the source of evil, and later become the Anti-Monitor's minions.

Video games
The Manhunters appear in DC Universe Online, voiced by David Jennison.
The Manhunters appear in Green Lantern: Rise of the Manhunters, voiced by Fred Tatasciore.

Miscellaneous
The Manhunters appear in the Injustice: Gods Among Us prequel comic.
The Manhunters appear in Smallville Season 11.