Masameer: The Movie (Arabic: مسامير: الفيلم) is a 2020 Saudi Arabian adult animated superhero comedy film directed by Malik Nejer (in his directorial debut) and written by Nejer & Abdulaziz Almuzaini. It is based on the web series Masameer created by Malik Nejer. It is the first animated film made entirely in Saudi Arabia.

Plot
When a deliveryman arrives to a house, Saltooh meets a man who says that their house will be demolished for lowering estate prices, causing pollution and being a general nuisance. They plan to build a restroom. In the house, Trad is seen putting Saad under a test which Saad lasted for 3 hours and 20 minutes until quitting. When Saltooh told the two their house is going to be demolished, their house was demolished.
They ended up being homeless. Saltooh and Saad say that they have struggles with Saad saying that he was a MIT graduate and he hasn't done anything meaningful until now and Saltooh saying that his mother calls him seeing if he has got a job, married someone and has children. They met an overweight man who looks in trash bins for treasure, the man found a Rolex, and a scooter complete with a helmet. After that, the three tried to search in a bin, but they were unlucky as they only found junk. But as it turns out, they are only looking in the bin for something to eat.
Meanwhile, a woman named Dana who was passionate about Artificial Intelligence was building a prototype for a robot named Fazzee who helps people, the prototype was initially a success, but the robot ended up accidentally destroying a car. Tomorrow, Saltooh, Saad and Trad create their own costume and grab weapons to fight the man. Saad ends up throwing the spear to him, and winning the battle.
They looked in the bin, Trad found a letter saying that they're invited to the Society of Heroes with Extraordinary Abilities. Trad decided to call their group the Three Gorooms. Dana wakes up and watches the TV. She hears that Dr. Adel tell news report that the Society of Heroes with Extraordinary Abilities is accepting applications and tryouts at the Riyadh International Convention and Exhibition Center with Dr. Adel saying that the world will always need more superheroes.
At the Convention and Exhibition Center, Trad explains that superheroes are respected by citizens. A man explains a people wearing superheroes. He also explains a tent where Dr. Adel hosts applications. Trad tell that they don't need an costume to join the Society of Superheroes with Extraordinary Abilities and that Dr. Adel will judge them by appearance but they get rejected by Dr. Adel because no costume, They get kicked out by security.

Voice cast
Malik Nejer as Saltooh / Saad / Trad / Dr. Adel / Dr. Nafea / Hizam
Shahad Alahmari as Dana
Yousef Aldakheel as Satam
Lama Alfard as Dana's Mom / Reporter
Abdulaziz Almuzaini as Dana's Dad / Fazeea
Mazroa Almazroa as Saleh / Captain Manteqi / Rbeaan
Hamad Almutaani as Emam
Shaalan Alshaalan as Sulaiteen
Abdulaziz Alshehri as Bandar / Manea
Riyad Alsalhani as Non
Sulaiman Alnazha

Release
It was released on January 9, 2020, in Arab theaters. Its international premiere was on March 19, 2020, on Netflix.
As of March 2023, the film was removed from Netflix. But was eventually bought back in 2024.

Future
On September 16, 2020, Myrkott Animation Studio signed a 5-year exclusivity deal with Netflix to produce shows and movies focused on Saudi society with a focus on producing more of Masameer. Masameer County Season 2 premiered on March 2, 2023, on its platform.