Mercy is a 2026 American science fiction film directed by Timur Bekmambetov, starring Chris Pratt and Rebecca Ferguson. The plot involves a detective (Pratt) accused of murdering his wife who must prove his innocence to an artificial intelligence judge (Ferguson). The film also stars Kali Reis, Annabelle Wallis, Chris Sullivan, and Kylie Rogers.

Mercy was released in the United States by Amazon MGM Studios on January 23, 2026. It has grossed $41 million worldwide and received negative reviews from critics.

Plot

In a futuristic Los Angeles with crime on the rise, the Mercy Capital Court uses AI judges to put defendants on trial for violent crimes. The AI judges give the defendants all available resources to find and provide all the evidence needed and are given 90 minutes to prove their innocence, or be executed via a sonic blast.

LAPD Detective Christopher "Chris" Raven, a strong proponent of the court, is strapped to a chair, put on trial for his wife Nicole's murder, and is given 90 minutes of investigation to persuade the judge of his innocence. Presiding over his case is the AI Judge Maddox. All the evidence points to Chris having killed his wife, as her blood was found on his clothing and doorbell camera footage places him at their home shortly before her murder. Chris's guilt probability is 97.5%, which he must lower to 92% to avoid execution.

Via Maddox's abilities, Chris learns that Nicole was seeing another man, Patrick Burke. Chris's partner Jacqueline "Jaq" Diallo finds Burke, who confides that Nicole felt unable to communicate her troubles to Chris about work. Her work email records show that there have been reports of stolen chemicals. Chris recalls hosting a barbecue with Nicole just days before the murder and reviews footage to see which co-workers were there.

Chris confronts his relapse in sobriety following the murder of his former partner, Ray Vale. Chris regrets not shooting the suspect, who was later acquitted. Chris's alcoholism led to aggression toward Nicole, and she began to consider a divorce.

Maddox shows Chris records of one co-worker, Holt Charles, who had financial issues and had discussed the chemical disappearance with Robert Nelson, Chris's sobriety sponsor. Suspecting Holt may have killed Nicole, Chris tries to contact Rob. Holt instead answers the phone, and he explains that Rob is responsible for the missing chemicals. Chris reviews his daughter Britt's social media posts, which reveal that a stranger had been hiding in their basement since the barbecue. His neighbor's security cameras display a rustling in the bushes, and Rob is seen exiting the neighbor's trunk in parking lot surveillance footage.

Chris sends Jaq to Rob's house, warning her and her team that he might be armed. The SWAT team arrives at Rob's house, finding it empty, but uncover the stolen chemicals and detailed plans to craft a bomb. Maddox discovers that Rob's brother, David Webb, was the first person Mercy Court executed and Chris realizes that Rob is orchestrating revenge against him and the court. Chris is officially acquitted for the murder, ending the trial. He tries to contact Britt, but footage from her grandparents' front door shows Rob kidnapping her and taking her into a stolen semi-truck. A bomb goes off, killing most of the SWAT team when Rob's shed explodes.

Jaq pursues Rob, who is transporting explosives toward Mercy Court to destroy the building with Chris inside. The police are able to divert Rob away from Mercy Court, and Jaq tries to get the task force captain to blow up the truck. Chris pleads against this, as Britt is with Rob, but the captain arms a bomb robot to detonate under the truck as Rob drives over it. The bomb robot does not detonate, and Rob eventually arrives to Mercy Court, crashing into the building. The network resets and locks Chris in, but Maddox reboots in time to free him.

Chris confronts Rob, and they fight until Chris is able to disarm Rob. Chris prepares to kill Rob, but Britt and Maddox talk him down. Jaq shoots Rob, who proclaims that David was innocent of the murder he was executed for, as Rob was on the phone with David at the time of the victim's death. Maddox retrieves footage that confirms this. It is revealed that Jaq dumped David's phone, which would have been enough evidence to exonerate David, in an effort to prove Mercy's efficacy. Jaq and Rob are both taken into custody. As Britt reconciles with Chris, Maddox shuts off and Chris's case is dismissed.

Cast

Chris Pratt as Det. Christopher "Chris" Raven, an LAPD officer who is on trial for the murder of his wife
Rebecca Ferguson as Judge Maddox, an AI who is part of the Mercy program

Kali Reis as Jacqueline "Jaq" Diallo, Chris's partner

Annabelle Wallis as Nicole Raven, Chris's late wife

Chris Sullivan as Robert "Rob" Nelson, Chris's AA sponsor and Nicole's co-worker

Kylie Rogers as Britt Raven, Chris's daughter

Kenneth Choi as Ray Vale, Chris's late partner

Rafi Gavron as Holt Charles, a co-worker of Nicole

Jeff Pierre as Patrick Burke, a man Nicole was seeing before she died

Tom Rezvan as a governor

Production

It was announced in January 2024 that a science fiction thriller film entitled Mercy was being made for Amazon MGM Studios with Chris Pratt starring, directed by Timur Bekmambetov from a script by Marco Van Belle and produced by Charles Roven, Robert Amidon, Bekmambetov, and Majd Nassif.

In March, Rebecca Ferguson and Annabelle Wallis joined the cast in undisclosed roles. In April, Kali Reis, Rafi Gavron, Chris Sullivan, Kenneth Choi and Kylie Rogers joined the cast. In May, Jeff Pierre joined the cast of the film.

Principal photography began on April 18, 2024, in Los Angeles, with Khalid Mohtaseb serving as the cinematographer. Pratt suffered an ankle injury on day four of filming, posting a photo of a swollen ankle on his Instagram page. Filming wrapped on May 23.

Music

Ramin Djawadi was revealed to have composed the score in January 2026.

Release
Mercy was shown early for patrons of AMC Theatres and Regal Cinemas on January 19, 2026, as part of their Screen Unseen and Monday Mystery Movie programs, respectively. This made it the first IMAX film to be released via the programs.
Mercy was released in the United States on January 23, 2026, in 3D and IMAX, having previously been due for release on August 15, 2025.

Reception

Box office

As of February 1, 2026, Mercy has grossed $19 million in the United States and Canada, and $22 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $41 million.

In the United States and Canada, Mercy was released alongside Return to Silent Hill, and was projected to gross $10–13 million in its opening weekend. It went on to debut to $12.6 million, becoming the first film to dethrone Avatar: Fire and Ash after five weeks, though its total was affected by the winter storm that closed about 400 theaters.

Critical response

On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 24% of 155 critics' reviews are positive. The website's consensus reads: "Constricting its two stars inside an airless presentation of a clunky techno-thriller premise, Mercy is tedious enough to make you cry uncle." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 34 out of 100, based on 34 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable" reviews. Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "B-" on an A+ to F scale.
