Ming-Hsuan Yang is a computer scientist, academic, and author. He is a professor at the University of California, Merced, and a research scientist at Google DeepMind.

Yang's work is focused on computer vision, machine learning, artificial intelligence, and robotics.

He is a fellow of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI).

Education and career

Yang received his Ph.D. degree in Computer Science from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.

Yang worked as a senior research scientist at the Honda Research Institute in Mountain View, California. He joined UC Merced in 2008. Since 2018, he has been a research scientist at Google DeepMind. He previously chaired the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) and the Asian Conference on Computer Vision (ACCV).

Research

Much of Yang's research has explored intelligent systems such as AI, machine learning, computer vision, and robotics. In a paper published in 2013, Yang assessed online object tracking algorithms through large-scale experiments, identifying methods, benchmarking performance, and highlighting key factors influencing tracking accuracy across different scenarios. He also presented a graph-based manifold ranking approach for saliency detection, integrating foreground and background cues, and benchmark dataset evaluation.
Yang has been named a highly cited researcher from 2018 to 2024.

Awards and honors
1999 – Ray Ozzie Fellowship, The Grainger College of Engineering
2009 – Google Faculty Award, Google
2010 – Distinguished Early Career Research Award, UC Merced
2012 – Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Award, NSF
2014 – Distinguished Research Award, UC Merced
2017 – Best Paper Honorable Mention, ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST)
2017 – Nvidia Pioneer Research Award
2018 – Best Paper Honorable Mention, IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)
2018 – Nvidia Pioneer Research Award
2018 – Best Student Paper Honorable Mention, Asian Conference on Computer Vision (ACCV)
2019 – Fellow, IEEE
2021 – Fellow, ACM
2023 – Longuet-Higgins Prize, IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)
2024 – Best Paper Award, International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML)
2025 – Fellow, AAAI
2025 – Test-of-Time Award, IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV)
