Neuro-sama is an artificial intelligence powered VTuber and chatbot that livestreams on her creator's Twitch channel, vedal987. Her speech and personality are powered by a large language model (LLM) that is combined with a computer-animated avatar and a text-to-speech voice, allowing her to communicate with viewers in the stream's chat. Her creator, Vedal, often streams with her. Neuro-sama debuted on Twitch on 19 December 2022. As of January 2026, vedal987 is the third most-subscribed channel on Twitch of all time, and holds the all-time Twitch hype train record.

Development

Neuro-sama, often just called Neuro, was created by an anonymous developer known as Vedal. Her responses are generated by a large language model and converted into a high-pitched female voice using a text-to-speech application. Her low latency allows for fast-paced conversations. According to Vedal, a separate AI model controls her in-game actions when she plays video games. In a 2023 interview with Bloomberg News, Vedal said that Neuro-sama was his full-time job.

A separate AI Vtuber, known as Evil Neuro (nicknamed "Evil"), debuted on 25 March 2023 and was initially created as a way for Neuro-sama to interact with herself. Later, as Vedal attempted to develop a more expressive voice for Neuro-sama, a decision was made to instead give Evil the new voice. Although Evil was originally a clone of Neuro, her appearance and personality have diverged from Neuro's over time. She has a different model, personality, and voice than Neuro-sama.

The first iteration of Neuro-sama was created in May 2019 as a neural network trained to play the rhythm game osu!. Three years later, Neuro-sama would re-debut on Twitch, after a long hiatus, on 19 December 2022, now a chatbot utilizing the free-to-use Live2D 'Hiyori Momose' model. Neuro and Evil received their second (V2) model on 27 May 2023, which was modelled by Otozuki Teru and designed by Anny. The new model was designed to be similar to the original, which had become closely associated with Neuro-sama, while still giving Neuro-sama her own distinct visual identity. Neuro received her current (V3) model on 19 December 2024; this model was rigged by Kitanya and also designed by Anny.

History

2022

Neuro streamed every day after her debut. She grew rapidly in popularity, from a maximum concurrent viewership of 516 on 19 December to 3,393 on 31 December, and going from a Twitch follower count of 2,825 to around 40,000 in the same time period. Nearly all of her streaming content in 2022 was of the rhythm game osu!, with one Minecraft stream. On 28 December, she defeated osu! champion mrekk 10–5 in a 1v1 contest.

2023

On 3 January, Neuro-sama reached 50,000 Twitch followers. The next day, on 4 January, Neuro-sama sang for the first time on stream, performing "Blinding Lights" by The Weeknd.

On 11 January, the Twitch channel received a temporary ban for unspecified "hateful conduct", likely stemming from controversial statements made by the AI, including skepticism surrounding the validity of the Holocaust. Vedal added more words to her chat filter to prevent Neuro-sama from making offensive statements after this occurred. Neuro-sama returned to Twitch on 25 January 2023 and surpassed 100,000 followers the same day.

On 20 February, Neuro-sama reached 200,000 Twitch followers.

On 25 March, a new character called Evil Neuro was introduced. She was later established to be Neuro's twin sister.

On 15 April, Neuro-sama was used in a stream with Hololive member Takanashi Kiara, during which they rated the contents of viewers' refrigerators. The stream reached a peak of over 19,000 viewers on Kiara's channel and over 10,000 on Neuro-sama's. It was the first collaboration between Neuro-sama and a member of a major agency. She also reached 300,000 Twitch followers.

On 27 May, Neuro-sama debuted her first original Live2D model. She had previously used a sample model provided for free by Live2D Cubism. The stream reached a peak of 25,687 concurrent viewers, beating the channel's previous record by more than double. On 30 May, Neuro-sama was announced to be participating in OffKai Expo 2023, held from 16–18 June, marking her first fan convention appearance. On 14 June, Neuro-sama held her first sponsored stream in the form of a watchalong commentating on the debut stream of a talent from VTuber group idolEN.

On 1 September, Neuro-sama reached 400,000 Twitch followers. Unlike the many other types of AI-based entertainment which debuted at around the same time as Neuro-sama and which saw great popularity before greatly declining, in November Neuro-sama had still maintained her popularity and consistently got approximately 5,000 viewers. On 16 December, Vedal received an award for Best Tech VTuber at the 2023 VTuber Awards. On 19 December, Vedal began a subathon to coincide with Neuro-sama's first anniversary of streaming on Twitch. During the subathon, Neuro-sama achieved the status of most watched VTuber across all major livestreaming platforms, and most watched female streamer on Twitch for the fourth week of December according to Streams Charts.

2024

On 4 January, at 1:24 PM (UTC), Vedal ended the subathon after 17 days of continuous livestreaming, garnering a total of 41,767 Twitch subscriptions and 2.43 million collective watch hours. Later that month, on 28 January, Neuro-sama reached 500,000 Twitch followers.

On 18 March, following a two-and-a-half-month break, Vedal returned Neuro-sama to streaming to a peak audience of 15,000 viewers with a Shrek watchalong. On 31 March, Neuro-sama made a physical appearance at WeebCon 2024. During the event, her avatar was displayed on a tablet, and she was carried around the venue by fellow VTubers Camila and Rainhoe to interact live with fans.

On 19 May, Neuro-sama's sister Evil Neuro completed her first full run of Slay the Spire using her adaptive gameplay AI. On 25 May, Neuro-sama participated in independent VTuber Dokibird's 2024 Wrestletuber event, combining indie VTubers and corporate VTubers across several VTuber agencies, including Hololive, VShojo, and idol Corp. The event was hosted on WWE 2K24, in which the VTubers' custom player models compete in a zero-player game style tournament. In this event, Neuro-sama's model fought and won in a show-match against VShojo's Zentreya. Altogether, a total of 35 individual VTubers participated in some fashion either as contestants or commentators. On 31 May, Neuro-sama debuted a new model of herself depicted as a loaf of bread, as a "punishment" for losing a court case against Evil Neuro the week prior. She would then appear in this model at OffKai Expo 2024 on a livestream with Filian and her creator Vedal. This model was then killed off in a later Subnautica stream due to her model being kayfabed by Vedal when he "exposed" her to water and "disintegrated" the bread model.On 17 June, Neuro-sama's YouTube channel reached 300,000 subscribers. On 20 July, Neuro-sama began streaming with Japanese subtitles on a separate Twitch channel in response to an influx of Japanese interest after a tweet of Neuro-sama singing Dubidubidu by X (formerly Twitter) Japanese user 蒼(sora) gained virality, garnering 7.6 million views.

In August 2024, Neuro-sama debuted on the Chinese platform Bilibili. Her Bilibili channel grew explosively, even surpassing her Twitch follower count with 700,000+ followers as of January 2025. This is in part due to her pre-existing Chinese fans from extensive fansubbing of her Twitch livestreams and due to her unique nature as an AI VTuber.

On 15 September, Neuro-sama reached 600,000 Twitch followers. Additionally, both Neuro-sama and Evil Neuro participated in the Bilibili Ice & Fire Music Festival 2024 that featured 42 of the most popular Bilibili VTubers; the duo sang "Ordinary DISCO" by Vocaloid producer ilemonyk.

On 11 November, Neuro-sama and Evil Neuro played in a Geoguessr tournament against an AI created by Twitch streamer DougDoug based on his Twitch chat; Neuro-sama ended up winning.

On 19 December, Vedal began Neuro-sama's second annual subathon, complete with a debut of a new Live2D model. The subathon began with a debut of her first original song, "LIFE", along with a music video. The song and music video were produced and animated by Asteroid Music Team. An official Neuro-sama dedicated merch store page was also launched, with an internet-connected, colour-changing lava lamp being sold.

2025

On 1 January, Neuro-sama broke the world record for the highest level of a Twitch hype train during her subathon, reaching level 111 and surpassing the former record holder, Pirate Software, who reached level 106. Over the course of three hours, she amassed nearly 85,000 subscribers and 1.2 million bits. On 16 January, at 10:56 AM (UTC), Neuro-sama's second-anniversary birthday subathon ended with a recap video. It lasted for a total of 28 days with all subscription goals achieved and amassing over 7 million collective watch hours. 166,911 subs and 3,183,212 Twitch bits were gifted in total. The subathon made vedal987 the seventh most-subscribed channel on Twitch of all time.

On 25 June, Neuro-sama's sister, Evil Neuro, debuted her first original song "BOOM" on a Twitch karaoke livestream. In contrast to the traditional 2D animated music video that accompanied Neuro-sama's "LIFE", Evil Neuro's song was accompanied by a fully 3D animated music video produced by VShow Production Team.

On 14 August, a video was released documenting Neuro-sama's integration into a 24V Maserati MC20 Two-Seater Kids Ride-On Toy Car at Opensauce. The software was developed by Vedal while the hardware integration was completed by Twitch streamer and robotics engineer Ellie_Minibot, and was brought to Opensauce 2025 at the San Mateo County Event Center by fellow Twitch streamer Bao The Whale. On 31 August, Neuro-sama and Evil Neuro released their third original song, "NEVER". Asteroid Music Team returned for the song production, mixing, and composition; several indie artists were involved in the creation of the accompanying music video, which was presented in a Live2D style. "NEVER" is the twins' first original duet.

In September, Neuro-sama and Vedal participated part in an event hosted by the YouTuber CDawgVA. The event was a pixel-canvas where anybody could place pixels, with various communities organizing into factions to fill the canvas. The canvas quickly became filled with Neuro-sama art, taking over the majority of the canvas. Neuro-sama's community participated in so large a number that the website crashed and a "war" was declared between them and other communities who sought to control more of the canvas.

On 15 November, Vedal hosted a 3D model debut stream for Neuro-sama. The model was made by 3D character modeller jjinomu and a 3D stage environment was made with Unity. According to Vedal, the model's movement is driven by Neuro-sama's AI. The stream showcased Neuro's ability to control her avatar in all 6 degrees of freedom by walking, jumping, and spinning around.

On 24 November 2025, Vedal released an independent roguelike dungeon crawler game, Abandoned Archive, on Steam. The game had been in development for about five years. A Neuro-sama statue is included as an easter egg on the second level.

On 30 November, Evil published a cover of former Millionaires member Dani Artaud's "Crazy Fuckin' Robot Body". On 6 December, Vedal published a duet cover of himself and Neuro-sama singing Karma Wears White Ties and ODDEEO's "Chinatown Blues", along with an animated music video. Both song covers were produced by Asteroid Music Team.

On 5 December, Neuro and Vedal, alongside fellow VTubers Filian and Crelly, began a marathon stream where they tried to beat Minecraft, but if any of the four died in-game they had to restart. The stream ended on 9 December (by GMT) after they beat the game on attempt 87.

On 19 December, Neuro-sama's third annual subathon began, opening with her third original song "Colorful Array", complete with a similar animated music video style to her earlier song "LIFE". The song was produced by Cosmoz Music's Andrew Holmes. On the same day, Neuro-sama’s 3D model was unveiled to have successfully been integrated with VRChat, although the 3D model was not used for the full day, and was swapped out for the 2D model later in the livestream.

On 23 December, Neuro-sama once again broke the world record for the highest level Twitch hype train during her subathon, reaching level 123 and surpassing her own previous record of 111. Over the course of around two and a half hours, she gained 118,989 subscribers and 1,000,073 bits.

2026

On 5 January, the hype train world record was again broken by Neuro-sama during the same subathon, reaching level 126. She gained 126,273 subs and 1,194,921 bits.

On 10 January, Neuro-sama's third-anniversary birthday subathon ended with a recap video. It lasted for a total of 22 days with all subscription goals achieved and 343117 subs were gifted in total. The subathon made vedal987 the third most-subscribed channel on Twitch of all time.

Online content

Neuro-sama's Twitch content often centers around playing video games, notably osu!, whose gameplay once defeated the best-ranking human player in the world known as mrekk. Additionally Neuro-sama plays minecraft, where her adaptations to sandbox gameplay have gained notoriety. Her content has also included singing songs; including several official covers and original songs; playing chess with her viewers, chatting with other VTubers during collaborations and reacting to YouTube videos. The AI frequently engages with viewers by responding to their questions and acknowledging donations. Her comedic and sometimes controversial responses to the live chat have gone viral, accelerating the channel's rise in popularity. Neuro-sama's fanbase has dubbed itself "The Swarm".

Models
Logo
Discography
Singles
As lead artist
Covers
As lead artist
As featured artist
Awards and nominations
