The Phalanx are a fictional cybernetic species appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. They have come into conflict with the X-Men as well as other groups on several occasions. They form a hive mind, linking each member by a telepathic system.

Publication history

The Phalanx were co-created by writer Scott Lobdell and artist Joe Madureira but owe much in concept and appearance to the original Technarchy by writer Chris Claremont and artist Bill Sienkiewicz. Appearing in prototype variations in earlier issues, the Phalanx are featured in Uncanny X-Men #312 (May 1994).

Fictional history

Origins

The Phalanx are believed to have been created by the Titans, a group of advanced disembodied consciousnesses so vast and dense, that they have caved in on their own combined intelligence to form black holes. These black holes form realms that exist outside normal space-time, where the Phalanx dwell.

The Phalanx wield advanced ships and use techno-organic viruses to create drones and infect civilizations. The virus compels its victims to build a "Babel Spire" to attract the Technarchy, who consume the planet. If the Phalanx find the society worthy or of great interest to them, they assimilate its members into their hive mind.

Phalanx on Earth

The Phalanx on Earth are initially formed by a group of human mutant haters who voluntarily infected themselves with the Transmode virus, taken from the remains of the renegade Technarch Warlock. Steven Lang, who had used the Sentinels against the X-Men many years before, is recruited to keep the Phalanx on track. Lang was assisted by Cameron Hodge, a fellow anti-mutant with immortality obtained from the demon N'astirh.

Phalanx' initial attempt to assimilate mutants into its collective is thwarted by the natural resistance of mutants to the Transmode virus. In a scheme to subvert the X-Men's mutant genome knowledge base, Phalanx attacks the X-Mansion, kidnaps most of the X-Men and replaces them with disguised Phalanx members. When Banshee discovers the Phalanx had accessed the location of several young mutants for use in further study, he alerts Wolverine and Cable.

While Banshee's group and Synch scrambles to save the young mutants, they are followed closely by the Phalanx. Eventually, the group saved all the targeted new mutants except for Blink, who sacrifices herself to save the rest and kill their captor, Harvest.

The rest of these young mutants went on to become the core of Generation X, tutored by Banshee and Emma Frost. Meanwhile, the other mutant teams found a group of Phalanx attempting to follow their genetic instruction to construct a Babel Spire to contact the Technarchy. Warlock returns from the dead, now possessing the memories of his friend Doug Ramsey. Now known as Douglock, Warlock leads Forge, Wolfsbane and Cannonball in destroying the spire. Cyclops' group assaults the core Phalanx base on Mount Everest to rescue the X-Men. They are covertly assisted by Steven Lang, who has realized that the Phalanx have grown beyond his control and are threatening Earth.

The Shi'ar Massacre

Another group of Phalanx nearly decimate the Shi'ar empire in the absence of the Imperial Guard. These versions have dark coloration and consider themselves "pure" Phalanx compared to such sects like the one on Earth. The Phalanx make their way to Chandilar, the throneworld of the Shi'ar empire, and attempt to assimilate the chamber where all Shi'ar eggs are being nurtured. Beast develops a device that would emit a certain frequency to separate the organic from the technological part, killing all Phalanx within its range.

Annihilation: Conquest

A new breed of Phalanx infect the Kree's defensive network, surrounding the entire Kree empire in an inescapable energy barrier. They also spread their Transmode Virus, turning all organic life forms into Phalanx under their control. High-powered beings such as Ronan the Accuser are made into their group Select, used to cut off any attempts to stop the spread and control of the Phalanx. The Kree who escape the Phalanx's control fight back against their oppressors, only to discover that they are controlled by Ultron.

Powers and abilities

In contrast to the fiercely independent Technarchy, the Phalanx exhibit a hive mind reminiscent of insects. Although individual members retain memories and some aspects of their personalities from before assimilation, they are typically unable to act against the collective will without first being disconnected from the group consciousness, as was the case with Douglock.

Phalanx, like the Technarchy, can infect other organisms with the transmode virus with any physical contact - the only known exception being Earth mutants who possess a degree of immunity to the transmode virus. This seems to be a limitation of the Phalanx which their Technarchy progenitors do not have, as Warlock was able to infect Magik with the transmode virus and form a symbiotic bond with Cypher.

Phalanx possess the Technarchs' abilities to shapeshift and teleport, but cannot grow in size and mass without absorbing external matter. Over time, they can adapt to attacks used against them.

Other versions

Cable

In an alternate reality, the Phalanx has overrun Earth, assimilating every lifeform. The mutant Cable serves as its central consciousness.

Exiles

In the series Exiles, the titular group visits a world infested by a mutated version of the Phalanx. On this world, Cypher fell ill with the Legacy Virus and in an act of desperation Warlock infected him with the transmode virus to save his life. The two viruses combine into a deadly plague that transforms most of Earth's population into Phalanx drones, calling themselves the Vi-Locks. The group is led by Forge, whose innate understanding of machinery made him a prime candidate for leadership. Morph eventually contacts the Asgardians, whose divine blood heals the infected via a transfusion.

Marvel 2099
In the possible future of 2099, the Phalanx attempt to invade Earth a second time. To prevent Earth from being converted by the Transmode Virus, Spider-Man 2099 forms an uneasy alliance with Doom 2099, who had encountered the Phalanx during their first attempt to invade Earth.

In other media

Television

The Phalanx appear in the X-Men: The Animated Series episode "Phalanx Covenant", with the Phalanx Nexus voiced by Lally Cadeau and additional forms voiced by Stephen Ouimette and Don Francks. An amalgamation of the original comics version and the Technarchy, this version of the species can change their appearance at will and assimilate humans.

The Phalanx appears in the Ultimate Spider-Man episode "Home Sick Hulk", voiced by Fred Tatasciore. These versions are metallic insectoids who can infect organic lifeforms and absorb organic matter.

Video games

The Phalanx appear in X-Men 2: Clone Wars.
