Plants vs. Zombies: Replanted is a 2025 tower defense video game developed by PopCap Games and The Lost Pixels, and published by Electronic Arts. It is a remaster of the 2009 game Plants vs. Zombies, introducing additional features and upscaled graphics. It was released for Windows and home consoles on October 23, 2025, and received generally positive reviews from critics.

Gameplay

Plants vs. Zombies: Replanted is a tower defense game where players defend their home while zombies approach from the right side of the screen. The player uses various plants with different abilities to combat the zombies. Some plants attack zombies directly while others are designed to slow them down, allowing the player to attack them.

The game is set on a five-row grid, where the player places plants to prevent the zombies from reaching the end of each row. Plants are purchased using "sun," a currency obtained by clicking sun icons that randomly drop from the sky during daytime or are produced by certain plants, like Sunflowers. If a zombie breaches all lines of defense, a lawn mower—or other similar, relevant object—will activate and clear the row, but if the lawn mower has already been used, and another zombie crosses, the game is over.

Replanted features

The remaster contains updated graphics and additional features, such as cut content previously only accessible from modifying the original game. The player is now able to speed up the game at will. Originally introduced in the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 ports of the original game, two multiplayer modes have been ported: Co-op and Versus. Both modes are local only; no online multiplayer is planned.

Two additional game modes are introduced in Replanted. "Cloudy Day" is a set of additional non-linear levels in the Adventure campaign. During these levels, the amount of sun dropped from the sky and produced by plants is lowered. At certain times, raining clouds move over the lawn. While the clouds are present, all sun-producing plants fall asleep and sun does not fall from the sky. However, each plant's sun cost is halved and plant recharge times are greatly reduced. In "R.I.P. Mode", the main campaign is replayed, but the player is forced back to the beginning if the player gets a game over.

Development

Replanted's existence was acknowledged in an interview with Janet Robin on the 16th anniversary of Plants vs. Zombies, where she talked about being contacted by Electronic Arts to make a rendition for one of the game's original soundtracks for a remaster of the original game. The game was officially announced in a Nintendo Direct live presentation in late July 2025. A "retro Peashooter skin" was additionally given as an incentive for people who pre-ordered the game. The game was showcased at PAX West on August 25, 2025.

None of the members of the original game's team were contacted or notified about Replanted. When a playable build of the game was leaked on October 17, 2025, data miners reportedly found assets that had been upscaled by artificial intelligence (AI), despite the official Twitter account's previous claims that AI was not used during development. PopCap would later clarify that the game does not use generative AI. Players reported multiple visual, behavioral, and audio bugs. Composer of the original game's soundtrack Laura Shigihara criticized the remaster's lack of adaptive music present in the original, questioning why it was not present despite being a modern remaster being held by a larger team. Additionally, some of the concept art found in the game was confirmed to be fake by Rich Werner, the original game's graphics artist.

Reception

Plants vs. Zombies: Replanted received "generally favorable" reviews from critics, according to review aggregator website Metacritic, and 56% of critics recommend the game according to OpenCritic.

IGN's Alessandro Fillari called it "a good way to get re-acquainted with one of the quirkiest puzzle-strategy games of the 2000s", while acknowledging its questionable decisions. Shacknews' David Craddock said it was his favourite version of Plants vs. Zombies, stating, "...it packs everything fans loved about the original game, plus lots more." while justifying its $20 price. The Verge described Replanted as "a time capsule from a simpler, happier time". Kyle Hilliard from Game Informer praised its faithfulness, complimenting the new animations and character designs that did not alter its memorability.

Final Weapon described the remake as solid, though criticised the lack of certain features and containing bugs that gate it from being excellent. Ben Lyons from Gamereactor, who gave a 6/10 rating, stated it is the same game "...as you know and love it", despite believing the £18 price is not justified.
