Pragmata is an upcoming action-adventure game developed and published by Capcom. Set on a lunar research station, the game follows spacefarer Hugh and android Diana as they work together to fight the hostile AI controlling the station and return to Earth. The game is scheduled to be released on April 24, 2026 for PlayStation 5, Windows, Nintendo Switch 2 and Xbox Series X/S.

Gameplay
Pragmata is an action-adventure video game played from a third-person perspective. The player controls both Hugh and Diana at the same time, as they look for a way to escape a lunar research station infested with hostile AI robots. Hugh is equipped with a number of firearms, and a jetpack that allows him to dodge hostile attacks and reach distant areas. Bullets cannot penetrate through a robot's armor, though Diana can hack into a robot's defense system, disabling it and revealing its weak point for Hugh to attack. In each puzzle, the player must guide the cursor across the grid to reach the target tile, evading obstacles and toggling optional bonus nodes which may bring additional combat advantages such as increased weapon damage for Hugh. The puzzles are solved in real-time, meaning that Hugh needs to dodge and evade hostile attack during each hacking sequence.

Plot
On a seemingly lifeless research station located on the moon, spacefarer Hugh and android Diana find themselves targeted by the hostile AI governing the station. The two must work together to defeat the AI and return to Earth.

Development
Pragmata is being developed by Capcom. The video game was originally announced on June 11, 2020, during Sony Interactive Entertainment's PlayStation 5 reveal stream, as Capcom's first original franchise in eight years. Based on Capcom's 2021 annual report, Brian Ashcraft of Kotaku wrote, "One reason why the game looks so different from other Capcom titles is that it’s the brainchild of new development staff".
Initially, it was announced for 2022, however in January 2021, Capcom announced that the game was delayed to 2023. In June 2023, Capcom released a trailer stating that the game had been delayed indefinitely. In June 2025, Capcom announced that the game would be coming out in 2026.
It was announced at the 2025 Game Awards that a demo was currently available on Steam. It was also announced that the game would be coming to the Nintendo Switch 2 and it would also get an amiibo based on Diana.