Raw Data Feel is the sixth studio album by British band Everything Everything, released on 20 May 2022 through Infinity Industries, the band's own imprint. The album was produced by the band's guitarist Alex Robertshaw and Tom A.D. Fuller, and its release was preceded by the singles "Bad Friday" (7 February), "Teletype" (9 March), "I Want a Love Like This" (28 March) and "Pizza Boy" (4 May). On 27 May 2022, The album reached #4 in the UK Album Charts, their highest-charting release to date. The album's creation was inspired by the band's experiences with artificial intelligence, which was employed to help provide ideas for song lyrics as well as the album's artwork.

Themes
The songs on Raw Data Feel deal with the theme of experiencing trauma and relying on technology to cope with it. Feeling constrained by his reputation as a "political singer" and wanting to "abandon the human brain", frontman and lead songwriter Jonathan Higgs envisioned a more inward, less sociopolitical approach by using characters to play the experience out.
With assistance from Mark Hanslip, a musician and researcher at the University of York's Contemporary Music Research Centre, Higgs developed an AI bot dubbed "Kevin", named after a recurring character in the album, to compose song lyrics generatively. Higgs fed it four different sources of information—LinkedIn's terms and conditions, the epic poem Beowulf, 400,000 posts from the message board 4chan, and the sayings of Confucius—before compiling and tweaking the results into usable material. Ultimately, the bot contributed roughly 5% of the album's lyrics and a song title ("Software Greatman"), receiving a songwriting credit in the process, and has also provided the imagery for the album's artwork and promotional campaign.
The band described the album's sound as "vivid, bright and spontaneous" and their "most natural and impulsive work".

Track listing
Personnel
Everything Everything

Jonathan Higgs – performance, art
Alex Robertshaw – performance, production, engineering
Jeremy Pritchard – performance
Michael Spearman – performance
Additional contributors

Tom A.D. – production, engineering
Frank Arkwright – mastering
Cenzo Townshend – mixing
Camden Clarke – mixing assistance
Jan Ashwell – mixing assistance
Henry Broadhead – engineering assistance
Martin King – engineering assistance
"Kevin" – art
Charlotte Audrey – design
Jonny Costello – design

Charts