Discussions on regulation of artificial intelligence in the United States have included topics such as the timeliness of regulating AI, the nature of the federal regulatory framework to govern and promote AI, including what agency should lead, the regulatory and governing powers of that agency, and how to update regulations in the face of rapidly changing technology, as well as the roles of state governments and courts.

Federal government regulatory measures
2016-2017
As early as 2016, the Obama administration had begun to focus on the risks and regulations for artificial intelligence. In a report titled Preparing For the Future of Artificial Intelligence, the National Science and Technology Council set a precedent to allow researchers to continue to develop new AI technologies with few restrictions. It is stated within the report that "the approach to regulation of AI-enabled products to protect public safety should be informed by assessment of the aspects of risk".

2018-2020
The first main report was the National Strategic Research and Development Plan for Artificial Intelligence. On August 13, 2018, Section 1051 of the Fiscal Year 2019 John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act (P.L. 115-232) established the National Security Commission on Artificial Intelligence "to consider the methods and means necessary to advance the development of artificial intelligence, machine learning, and associated technologies to comprehensively address the national security and defense needs of the United States." Steering on regulating security-related AI is provided by the National Security Commission on Artificial Intelligence. The Artificial Intelligence Initiative Act (S.1558) is a proposed bill that would establish a federal initiative designed to accelerate research and development on AI for, inter alia, the economic and national security of the United States.
On January 7, 2019, following an Executive Order on Maintaining American Leadership in Artificial Intelligence, the White House's Office of Science and Technology Policy released a draft Guidance for Regulation of Artificial Intelligence Applications, which includes ten principles for United States agencies when deciding whether and how to regulate AI. In response, the National Institute of Standards and Technology has released a position paper, and the Defense Innovation Board has issued recommendations on the ethical use of AI. A year later, the administration called for comments on regulation in another draft of its Guidance for Regulation of Artificial Intelligence Applications.
Other specific agencies working on the regulation of AI include the Food and Drug Administration, which has created pathways to regulate the incorporation of AI in medical imaging. National Science and Technology Council also published the National Artificial Intelligence Research and Development Strategic Plan, which received public scrutiny and recommendations to further improve it towards enabling Trustworthy AI.

2020-2021
In March 2021, the National Security Commission on Artificial Intelligence released their final report. In the report, they stated, "Advances in AI, including the mastery of more general AI capabilities along one or more dimensions, will likely provide new capabilities and applications. Some of these advances could lead to inflection points or leaps in capabilities. Such advances may also introduce new concerns and risks and the need for new policies, recommendations, and technical advances to assure that systems are aligned with goals and values, including safety, robustness and trustworthiness."
In June 2022, Senators Rob Portman and Gary Peters introduced the Global Catastrophic Risk Management Act. The bipartisan bill "would also help counter the risk of artificial intelligence... from being abused in ways that may pose a catastrophic risk". On October 4, 2022, President Joe Biden unveiled a new AI Bill of Rights, which outlines five protections Americans should have in the AI age: 1. Safe and Effective Systems, 2. Algorithmic Discrimination Protection, 3.Data Privacy, 4. Notice and Explanation, and 5. Human Alternatives, Consideration, and Fallback. The Bill was formally published in October 2022 by the Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP), a U.S. government office that advises the President on science and technology policy matters.

2023-2024
In July 2023, the Biden administration secured voluntary commitments from seven companies – Amazon, Anthropic, Google, Inflection, Meta, Microsoft, and OpenAI – to manage the risks associated with AI. The companies committed to ensure AI products undergo both internal and external security testing before public release; to share information on the management of AI risks with the industry, governments, civil society, and academia; to prioritize cybersecurity and protect proprietary AI system components; to develop mechanisms to inform users when content is AI-generated, such as watermarking; to publicly report on their AI systems' capabilities, limitations, and areas of use; to prioritize research on societal risks posed by AI, including bias, discrimination, and privacy concerns; and to develop AI systems to address societal challenges, ranging from cancer prevention to climate change mitigation. In September 2023, eight additional companies – Adobe, Cohere, IBM, Nvidia, Palantir, Salesforce, Scale AI, and Stability AI – subscribed to these voluntary commitments.
In January 2023, the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) released the Artificial Intelligence Risk Management Framework (AI RMF 1.0), providing voluntary guidance for organizations to identify, assess, and manage risks associated with AI systems.
The Biden administration, in October 2023 signaled that they would release an executive order leveraging the federal government's purchasing power to shape AI regulations, hinting at a proactive governmental stance in regulating AI technologies. On October 30, 2023, President Biden released this Executive Order on Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence. The Executive Order addresses a variety of issues, such as focusing on standards for critical infrastructure, AI-enhanced cybersecurity, and federally funded biological synthesis projects.
The Executive Order provides the authority to various agencies and departments of the US government, including the Energy and Defense departments, to apply existing consumer protection laws to AI development. The Executive Order builds on the Administration's earlier agreements with AI companies to instate new initiatives to "red-team" or stress-test AI dual-use foundation models, especially those that have the potential to pose security risks, with data and results shared with the federal government.
The Executive Order also recognizes AI's social challenges, and calls for companies building AI dual-use foundation models to be wary of these societal problems. For example, the Executive Order states that AI should not "worsen job quality", and should not "cause labor-force disruptions". Additionally, Biden's Executive Order mandates that AI must "advance equity and civil rights", and cannot disadvantage marginalized groups. It also called for foundation models to include "watermarks" to help the public discern between human and AI-generated content, which has raised controversy and criticism from deepfake detection researchers.

2025
In January 2025, President Donald Trump repealed Executive Order 14110, reflecting his administration's preference for deregulating AI in support of innovation over safeguarding risks.
In early 2025, Congress began advanced bipartisan legislation targeting AI-generated deepfakes, including the "TAKE IT DOWN Act," which would prohibit nonconsensual disclosure of AI-generated "intimate imagery", requiring all platforms to remove such content. Additionally, lawmakers also reintroduced the CREATE AI Act to codify the National AI Research Resource (NAIRR), which aimed to expand public access to computing resources, datasets, and AI testing environments. Additionally, the Trump administration also signed Executive Order #14179 to initiate a national "AI Action Plan", focusing on securing U.S. global AI dominance in a way in which the White House can seek public input on AI safety and standards. At the state level, new laws have also been passed or proposed to regulate AI-generated impersonations, chatbot disclosures, and even synthetic political content. Meanwhile, the Department of Commerce also expanded export controls on AI technology, and NIST published an updated set of guidances on AI cybersecurity risks.
In March 2025, OpenAI made a policy proposal for the Trump administration to preempt pending AI-related state laws with federal laws. Meta, Google, IBM and Andreessen Horowitz have also pressured the government to adopt national rules that would rein in state laws. States like California, which is considering the most AI regulations of all states would be hit hard. California legislature is considering several AI laws that would require insurance companies to report the use of AI when denying healthcare claims, as well as regulations that requires the AI to be performance tested before making implementation on certain applications. In May 2025, House Republicans inserted into a tax and spending bill a clause banning state AI laws for 10 years, which was met with opposition from more than 100 nonprofit organizations, elected officials, public policy experts, and others. The Senate voted 99-1 to defeat the ban. In September 2025, Sen. Ted Cruz (a supporter of the AI state moratorium) said that the proposal would return for debate in Congress.
In December 2025, Trump signed Executive Order 14365 "Ensuring a National Policy Framework for Artificial Intelligence" which seeks to preempt state regulation.

State and local government interventions
In January 2023, the New York City Bias Audit Law (Local Law 144) was enacted by the NYC Council in November 2021. Originally due to come into effect on 1 January 2023, the enforcement date for Local Law 144 has been pushed back due to the high volume of comments received during the public hearing on the Department of Consumer and Worker Protection's (DCWP) proposed rules to clarify the requirements of the legislation. It eventually became effective on July 5, 2023. From this date, the companies that are operating and hiring in New York City are prohibited from using automated tools to hire candidates or promote employees, unless the tools have been independently audited for bias.
In February 2024, Senator Scott Wiener introduced the Safe and Secure Innovation for Frontier Artificial Intelligence Models Act to the California legislature. The bill drew heavily on the Biden executive order and had the goal of reducing catastrophic risks by mandating safety tests for the most powerful AI models. If passed, the bill would have established a publicly-funded cloud computing cluster in California. On September 29, 2024. Governor Gavin Newsom vetoed the bill. It is considered unlikely that the legislature will override the governor's veto with a two-thirds vote from both houses.
On March 13, 2024, Utah Governor Spencer Cox signed the S.B 149 "Artificial Intelligence Policy Act". This legislation went into effect on May 1, 2024. It established liability, notably for companies that do not disclose their use of generative AI when required by state consumer protection laws, or when users commit criminal offense using generative AI. It also created the Office of Artificial Intelligence Policy and the Artificial Intelligence Learning Laboratory Program.
On March 21, 2024, the State of Tennessee enacted legislation called the ELVIS Act, aimed specifically at audio deepfakes, and voice cloning. This legislation was the first enacted legislation in the nation aimed at regulating AI simulation of image, voice and likeness.  The bill passed unanimously in the Tennessee House of Representatives and Senate. This legislation's success was hoped by its supporters to inspire similar actions in other states, contributing to a unified approach to copyright and privacy in the digital age, and to reinforce the importance of safeguarding artists' rights against unauthorized use of their voices and likenesses.
In April 2024, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) announced Operation AI Comply, a cross-agency initiative to ensure that AI products and marketing claims comply with existing consumer-protection, fair-credit, and truth-in-advertising laws.
The FTC stated that companies deploying AI systems must "keep their AI claims in check" and warned that false or misleading representations about AI capabilities would be subject to enforcement under the FTC Act.
On May 17, 2024, Colorado Governor Jared Polis signed the Colorado AI Act (CAIA) into law. The CAIA establishes requirements for deployers and developers of high-risk AI systems, including transparency obligations and risk assessments, to prevent algorithmic discrimination against Colorado residents. It is the first comprehensive, state-level law that regulates high-risk AI systems in the United States. After passing, the law unpopular among pro-business advocates. An attempt to amend the regulation failed, but its implementation was delayed from the original February 1, 2026 start date to an expected June 1, 2026 start. Jared Polis has created a committee to investigate its implementation. Brianna Titone, the bill's sponsor, criticized the commission for being full of industry representatives without representation from consumers across the state.

Other perspectives
In 2016, Joy Buolamwini, AI researcher at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, shared her personal experiences with discrimination in facial recognition software at a TED Talk conference. Facial recognition software is widely understood to be inaccurate in its identification of darker-skinned peoples, which matters especially in the context of policing, the criminal justice system, healthcare system, and employment sectors.
In 2022, the PEW Research Center's study of Americans revealed that only 18% of respondents are more excited than they are concerned about AI. Biases in AI algorithms and methods that lead to discrimination are causes for concern among many activist organizations and academic institutions. Recommendations include increasing diversity among creators of AI algorithms and addressing existing systemic bias in current legislation and AI development practices.
In August 2025, Silicon Valley companies and investors pledged up to $200 million to two new pro-AI super PACs, Meta California (funded by Meta) and Leading the Future. According to the New York Times, the super PACs criticize politicians who are "insufficiently supportive of the push into artificial intelligence" ahead of the 2026 midterm elections.