Robotrix (Chinese 女机械人 pinyin: nǚ jīxièrén "Woman Robot") is a 1991 Hong Kong science fiction exploitation film directed by Jamie Luk Kin-ming and produced by the Golden Harvest Company. Bill Lui, the winner of the 23rd Hong Kong Film Awards (Best Art Direction), is the Art Director of this film. It features the voluptuous soft-porn star Amy Yip, Taiwanese-American actor David Wu, Japanese actress Chikako Aoyama, kung fu expert Billy Chow, and Hui Hsiao-dan. The plot concerns a female police officer who is gunned down, only to have her mind transferred into a cyborg clone.
The idea of mind uploading as well as some cult elements inside the film make Robotrix become a science fiction film classic in Hong Kong.
This erotic R-rated thriller is notable for a Hong Kong film on general release in featuring frequent female full-frontal nudity, and is particularly notable for a scene of brief full-frontal male nudity (of Hong Kong Chinese actor Chung Lin, playing the robot version of Japanese scientist Ryuichi Yamamoto), as it is perhaps the first time in Hong Kong cinema that a Chinese adult male's genitals have been fully revealed on camera in a film for general release. It was also perhaps notable for leading the way in Hong Kong category 3 martial arts films. Cast member Vincent Lyn said of the film, "Now that was one wild shoot. The cast and crew were all over the place and you were lucky to find out what you were doing before the cameras rolled. I spent more time laughing on the set than anything else."

Plot
A criminally insane scientist, Ryuichi Sakamoto (Chung Lin), transfers his mind into a cyborg and immediately commits a series of rapes and murders. Among his victims is female police officer Selena Lin (Chikako Aoyama). The scientist Dr. Sara (Hui Hsiao-dan) transfers Selena's mind into a cyborg named Eve-27, including Sara's robotic assistant named Ann (Amy Yip), the cyborg-robot team join the police force and pursue the criminal Sakamoto by investigating a series of murdered prostitutes. After Selena/Eve-27 have sexual relations with her policeman boyfriend Chou (David Wu), Ann become curious about human sexual activity, but without human mind Ann is not capable to know further...

Cast
Amy Yip – Ann
David Wu – Chou
Chikako Aoyama – Selena Lin/Eve-27
Billy Chow – Ryuichi Sakamoto's cyborg
Chung Lin – Ryuichi Sakamoto
Hui Hsiao-dan – Doctor Sara
Ng Kin-chung – Puppy
Bowie Wu – Police Commissioner
Lee Hin-Ming – Informer Hui

Box office
The film grossed HK$5,486,008 at the Hong Kong box office during its theatrical run from 31 May to 13 June 1991 in Hong Kong.

Blu-ray reprint
This film was first released on Blu-ray Disc on March 27, 2020. Then on November 11, 2024, online boutique movie store Shoutfactory released a Blu-Ray Disc of “Robotrix” as a part of its Golden Harvest compilation release called “Golden Harvest Vol. 1 Supernatural Shockers.”