Science and technology in Spain relates to the set of policies, plans and programs carried out by the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation and other organizations aimed at research, development and innovation (R&D&I), as well as the reinforcement Spanish scientific and technological infrastructures and facilities such as universities and commercial laboratories.

Spain has become the ninth scientific power in the world with 2.5% of the total number of scientific publications, thus surpassing Russia in the world ranking of scientific production and surpassing Switzerland and Australia in scientific quality.

Regulations

Science Law of 1986

Law 13/1986 on the "Promotion and General Coordination of Scientific and Technical Research" placed science for the first time on the Spanish political agenda, laying the foundations for research and its financing, organization and coordination between the State and the autonomous regions. That regulation also led to the birth of the national research plan as an "instrument for financing science". It also meant that public research organizations could create companies, as a solution to the lack of companies that encouraged new technologies and the disconnection of the science-technology system with the productive system.

Science, Technology and Innovation Law (2011)

It is regulated by Law 14/2011, of 1 June 2011, on "Science, Technology and Innovation", which entered into force six months after its publication. According to the Ninth Final Provision of the Law, some of its provisions have the character of basic legislation. This provides a mechanism for national, regional and corporative entities to cooperate and optimise their resources.

Article 21 of the Law contemplates the pre-doctoral contract.

Science Law 2022

In 2020, the Ministry published the prior consultation on the reform of the Science Law. Through the 2021 Budget Law, the legal figure of the state agency was reintroduced for the State Research Agency (AEI) and the Spanish National Research Council (CSIC), which had been transformed into an autonomous body in 2015. State agencies have greater independence for the management of their budget. A new Science Law is expected to be approved in 2022.
