Steam Frame is an upcoming virtual reality headset developed by Valve Corporation. Announced in November 2025 as part of a new lineup of Valve-produced hardware, and replacing its predecessor the Valve Index, it is expected to be released in early 2026.

The Frame is a standalone headset utilizing inside-out tracking. It can run software (including both VR and non-VR games) natively via its Linux-based SteamOS operating system, leveraging the existing Proton compatibility layer for Microsoft Windows software, as well as additional compatibility layers for Android apps (primarily for running software targeting similar standalone headsets such as Meta Quest), and running x86-64 code on its ARM-based CPU. It can also stream software wirelessly from a personal computer using Steam Link. Unlike the Valve Index, the Frame does not need to be physically tethered to a PC, nor does it require external "lighthouse" base stations placed in the room.

Specifications

Hardware

The Steam Frame has a visor-like design; Valve stated that the base unit had a weight of 185 grams (0.408 lb), and 440 grams (0.97 lb) when the default facial interface, battery, and strap is installed. It uses LCD displays viewed through pancake lenses, with a per-eye resolution of 2160×2160, and support for refresh rates of 72, 80, 90, 120 and 144 Hz, and physical interpupillary distance adjustment via a knob. It will support eye tracking, which can be used for foveated rendering.

The Frame will use a Qualcomm Snapdragon 8 Gen 3 system-on-chip with 16 GB of LPDDR5X memory, and be sold in models with 256 GB and 1 TB of internal storage. Additional storage space is available through a microSD card slot; memory cards can be shared between other SteamOS devices such as Steam Deck and the second-generation Steam Machine.

Wi-Fi connectivity will be implemented with multiple Wi-Fi 7 radios in order to split internet and VR streaming traffic across 5GHz and 6GHz bands respectively. A Wi-Fi 6E USB adapter will be bundled with the Frame to provide a dedicated 6GHz connection between a PC and the headset, bypassing local area networks to reduce latency and congestion. Use of the adapter is optional, and users will be able to stream over existing local Wi-Fi networks.

The front of the headset contains four monochrome passthrough cameras and infrared emitters for inside-out tracking using simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM). Its motion controllers are similar in design to the Touch Plus controllers used by the Meta Quest 3, but with a button layout similar to standard gamepads for improved compatibility with non-VR games, including a D-pad on the left controller and four face buttons on the right. The analog sticks will use tunneling magnetoresistance, making them less susceptible to stick drift.

Valve will release CAD files and specifications to allow for the development of third-party accessories and attachments. The device includes an expansion port with a lane of PCI Express gen 4 connectivity and a MIPI camera interface; Valve suggested that the port could be used for accessories such as face tracking, depth sensors, and color passthrough cameras.

Software

The Frame will run a version of Valve's Arch Linux-based SteamOS, supporting both VR and non-VR games from Steam. It will include various compatibility layers for OS and processor support, including Proton for Microsoft Windows games, FEX-Emu for emulating x86 software on ARM, and Lepton (a fork of Waydroid) as an Android Open Source Project (AOSP)-based runtime environment with sideloading support. Lepton is intended primarily for games targeting standalone headsets such as Meta Quest, and the Steam store will also add support for publishing APK files. Similarly to Steam Deck, the Steam storefront will mark games tested for compatibility with the headset as being "Steam Frame Verified".

VR software can also be wirelessly streamed to the Frame from a gaming PC using Steam Link, with Valve emphasizing this functionality by promoting the device as a "streaming-first" headset. Streaming will leverage an encoding technique Valve refers to as "foveated streaming", a variation of foveated rendering where eye tracking data is used to selectively increase the bitrate of the stream based on where the user is looking. Unlike foveated rendering, this technique is applied at the encoder level and does not require a game to be specifically coded to support it.

History

In 2021, Ars Technica reported from internal sources that Valve had multiple prototypes for a new VR headset in development, including a PC-based headset that would directly succeed the Valve Index, as well as a standalone headset similar to Oculus Quest. Over the course of the year, updates to the SteamVR runtimes began to add references to a device codenamed "Deckard", as well as functionality of relevance to standalone VR headsets. These changes were especially apparent on the ARM Linux builds of SteamVR. In September 2024, it was reported via data from SteamDB that Valve had been testing games on an AArch64 platform using FEX and Waydroid runtimes, including VR titles.

In September 2025, it was reported that Valve had filed for trademarks on the name "Steam Frame" for use on video game hardware. On November 12, 2025, Valve officially announced Steam Frame as part of a new wave of hardware products, including the second-generation Steam Machine. It is expected to be released in early 2026. Pricing details were not announced, but Valve stated that it expected Steam Frame to be cheaper than the Index.

SteamOS developer Pierre-Loup Griffais believed that the device's use of ARM processors was a first step by Valve towards other devices utilizing them, including future handhelds.
