The Supreme Intelligence, also known as the Supremor, is a fictional character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics, an artificial intelligence that rules the alien race known as the Kree.
The Supreme Intelligence has appeared in various media outside comics, including animated series and video games. It made its film debut in the Marvel Cinematic Universe film Captain Marvel (2019), set in the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU), where it assumed the appearance of Mar-Vell (portrayed by Annette Bening). The Supreme Intelligence later appeared in its true form in the film The Marvels (2023).

Publication history
The Supreme Intelligence first appeared in Fantastic Four #65 (August 1967), and was created by Stan Lee and Jack Kirby.

Fictional character biography
The Supreme Intelligence is an artificial being created by the Kree that consists of the disembodied minds of deceased Kree. The Supreme Intelligence becomes the ruler of the Kree, building a fanatical religious worship around itself.
The Supreme Intelligence is deposed as the leader of the Kree Empire by Ronan the Accuser. It is later revealed to have influenced Rick Jones to regain its power and attempt to restart the Kree's stagnant evolutionary process. However, the latter goal is unsuccessful.
During the "Operation: Galactic Storm" storyline, the Supreme Intelligence detonates a Nega-Bomb to influence the Kree's genetic potential, only to kill billions of Kree. In response, the Avengers execute the Supreme Intelligence. The Supreme Intelligence survives by transferring its consciousness into a starship, but is presumed dead, with the Kree empire falling under the control of the Shi'ar. The Supreme Intelligence later escapes and restores its body by draining energy from Rick Jones.
In the Annihilation event, the Supreme Intelligence is deposed by the House of Fiyero, a Kree merchant guild. Ronan kills the members of the House of Fiyero, then kills the Supreme Intelligence after realizing that it cannot be restored.
Ronan later resurrects the Supreme Intelligence by fusing two alternate universe variants of Reed Richards with the Supremor Seed, a portion of the Supreme Intelligence held dormant in Ronan's hammer.
In "The Black Vortex" storyline, the Supreme Intelligence is killed when J'son and the Slaughter Lords destroy Hala, the homeworld of the Kree.
In Captain Marvel (vol. 10), fragments of the Supreme Intelligence fuse with the Super-Inhuman Vox. However, Vox is destroyed by Binary, a clone of Carol Danvers. In the one-shot Captain Marvel: Assault on Eden, the Supreme Intelligence returns in a digital form, but is destroyed by Carol Danvers.

Powers and abilities
The Kree Supreme Intelligence is a vast cybernetic/organic computer system that contains the disembodied, preserved brains of the greatest statesmen and philosophers in Kree history. This aggregation of brains creates a collective intelligence able to use the vast information storage and processing capabilities of the computer system in a creative way. When wishing to interact with it, the Kree address it within its terminal chamber, where a holographic image is projected on a gigantic monitor screen.
The Supreme Intelligence possesses a seemingly immeasurable intellect, with vast knowledge far surpassing that of present-day Earth. It possesses information storage and processing abilities far above that of the human brain and various psychic abilities, including telepathy, telekinesis, and precognition.
The Supreme Intelligence is also capable of manipulating energy and matter, as well as create up to three remotely-controlled android servitors as extensions of itself.
Its power was enhanced when it merged with an inert Cosmic Cube, which now serves as its true housing, kept in a separate room from the organic computer facade it created. Upon assuming its new housing, the Supreme Intelligence was now able to control reality within a limited distance of itself, as well as create portals between dimensions, most notably the Astral Plane and the dimension of Death.

Other versions
The Marvel Boy mini-series by Grant Morrison featured an alternate universe version of Supremor who is an ally to Noh-Varr, the last survivor of a Kree ship that crashed to Earth. Known as Plex, this Supreme Intelligence displayed multiple personalities, with each specializing in specific situations.

In other media
Television
The Supreme Intelligence appears in X-Men: The Animated Series, voiced by Len Carlson.
The Supreme Intelligence appears in the Silver Surfer episode "The Forever War", voiced by David Hemblen.
The Supreme Intelligence appears in Fantastic Four: World's Greatest Heroes, voiced by John Novak.
The Supreme Intelligence appears in The Avengers: Earth's Mightiest Heroes, voiced by David Kaye.
The Supreme Intelligence appears in Hulk and the Agents of S.M.A.S.H., voiced by Clancy Brown.
The Supreme Intelligence appears in Guardians of the Galaxy, voiced by Kevin Michael Richardson.

Marvel Cinematic Universe
The Supreme Intelligence appears in media set in the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU).

The Supreme Intelligence first appears in the film Captain Marvel (2019). This version assumes the physical form of the individual most respected by whomever is speaking to it. For Carol Danvers, the Supreme Intelligence assumes the form of Wendy Lawson (portrayed by Annette Bening).
The Supreme Intelligence appears in a flashback in The Marvels (2023), where it is destroyed by Danvers.

Video games
The Supreme Intelligence appears as a playable character in Avengers in Galactic Storm.
The Supreme Intelligence appears in Lego Marvel Super Heroes 2, voiced by Gary Martin.
The Supreme Intelligence appears in Marvel Cosmic Invasion, voiced by Kerry Shale.