The Systems Engineering Body of Knowledge (SEBoK), formally known as Guide to the Systems Engineering Body of Knowledge, is a wiki-based collection of key knowledge sources and references for systems engineering. The SEBoK is a curated wiki meaning that the content is managed by an editorial board, and updated on a regular basis. This wiki is a collaboration of three organizations: 1) International Council on Systems Engineering (INCOSE), 2) IEEE Systems Council, and 3) Stevens Institute of Technology. The most recent version (v.2.11) was released on November 25, 2024.

History
The Guide was developed over three years, from 2009 to 2012, through the contributions of 70 authors worldwide. During this period, three prototype versions were created. The first prototype (v.0.25) was a document that was released for review in September 2010. However, the final versions were all published online as agreed by the authors in January 2011. This switch to a wiki-based SEBoK began with v.0.50.
The first version of the SEBoK for public use was published online in September 2012. The initial release was named 2012 product of the year by the International Council on Systems Engineering. Since then, the guide had several revisions and minor updates leading to the 23rd release, as of Nov 2024. Version 1.7, released on October 27, 2016, added a new Healthcare Systems Engineering knowledge area.

Knowledge areas
According to the site, the guide has a total of 26 knowledge areas distributed among the different parts. However, the majority of these knowledge areas can be grouped to form nine general knowledge areas. The general and specific knowledge areas are:

Science & Technology Knowledge
Introduction to Life Cycle Processes
Life Cycle Models
Concept Definition
Domain Technology Knowledge
System Definition
System Realization
System Deployment and Use
Operational Environment Knowledge
Engineering Discipline/ Specialty Knowledge
Systems Engineering and Software Engineering
Systems Engineering and Project Management
Systems Engineering and Industrial Engineering
Systems Engineering and Specialty Engineering
Sector & Enterprise Knowledge
Product Systems Engineering
Service Systems Engineering
Enterprise Systems Engineering
Systems of Systems (SoS)
Healthcare Systems Engineering
Management & Leadership Knowledge
Enabling Businesses and Enterprises
Enabling Teams
Enabling Individuals
Systems Engineering Management
Product and Service Life Management
Education & Training Knowledge
People & Competency Knowledge
Systems Engineering Standards
Social/ Systems Science Knowledge
Systems Fundamentals
Systems Science
Systems Thinking
Representing Systems with Models
Systems Approach Applied to Engineered Systems