Teri Baaton Mein Aisa Uljha Jiya (transl. The heart got so entangled in your words) is a 2024 Indian Hindi-language science fiction romantic comedy film directed and written by Amit Joshi and Aradhana Sah, in their directorial debuts, and produced by Maddock Films and Jio Studios. The film stars Shahid Kapoor and Kriti Sanon in lead roles.
Principal photography commenced in October 2022 and concluded in April 2023. The film was released theatrically on 9 February 2024. The film grossed ₹133.64 crore, emerging as a commercial success. It became the seventh highest-grossing Hindi film of 2024.
At 70th Filmfare Awards it received five nomination including   Best Debut Director (Joshi and Sah) and Best Actress (Sanon).

Plot
Aryan Agnihotri, a smart robotics engineer born in Delhi, now based in Mumbai, follows in the footsteps of his aunt, Urmila Shukla, who owns a company, E-Robotics, in Los Angeles. Urmila invites Aryan to the U.S., where he eventually meets SIFRA (Super Intelligent Female Robot Automation), Urmila's secretary. Aryan is unaware that SIFRA is a robot and falls in love with her. However, he later discovers that SIFRA is actually a robot, created by his aunt as a test to see if humans could differentiate SIFRA from themselves.
Heartbroken by the revelation, Aryan returns to India and agrees to an arranged marriage. But as the engagement approaches, Aryan realizes his true feelings for SIFRA. He decides to sneak out of the engagement ceremony but is caught by his grandfather, who encourages him to follow his heart, assuring Aryan that he will handle the family in his absence. Aryan wishes to have SIFRA in India to introduce her to his family, so he calls his aunt and requests that she send SIFRA to India for further "testing" within a traditional Indian family setting. Urmila agrees, and SIFRA is sent to India, where Aryan introduces her as his girlfriend, leading to numerous comical situations.
Aryan's family, unaware of SIFRA's true nature, agrees to their marriage. However, just before the wedding, SIFRA installs a faulty update, riddled with a virus, which corrupts her memory and causes her to forget everything. In desperation, Aryan calls his aunt for help, who sends him a memory backup. Aryan successfully restores SIFRA's memory, but Urmila, who was unaware of Aryan's intentions to marry SIFRA, is furious when she learns the truth. She demands that Aryan return SIFRA, claiming she is the intellectual property (IP) of her company. After an emotional conversation, Aryan convinces his aunt to let him keep SIFRA.
On their wedding day, a blackout occurs while SIFRA is charging, causing her to malfunction. Her speech becomes distorted, and her movements begin to glitch, executing previously given orders that had since been canceled, including one to "set Delhi on fire." Witnessing the destruction caused by SIFRA, a devastated Aryan is forced to stop her by slashing her face with a sword, revealing the inner technical workings and realizing that, despite her human appearance, she can never truly be human.
Later, at a tech show in Mumbai, Urmila launches a new series of robots, including SIFRA 2.0. The new SIFRA has her memory and settings formatted, and Aryan is no longer her administrator. Jiah, a new intern, approaches Aryan and flirts with him. Observing their interaction, the new SIFRA starts to display jealousy, shocking Aryan as he realizes that she may be developing feelings of her own.

Cast
Production
In August 2022, Shahid Kapoor and Kriti Sanon were signed to star in Dinesh Vijan's next robot rom-com. Production began in October 2022 and ended in April 2023. In November 2022 the song "Akhiyaan Gulab" was filmed at beach. In January 2023 Dharmendra started filming. In April 2023 Janhvi Kapoor appeared for her cameo. The film's title Teri Baaton Mein Aisa Uljha Jiya was revealed in January 2024.

Soundtrack
The music of Teri Baaton Mein Aisa Uljha Jiya is composed by Tanishk Bagchi, Sachin–Jigar, Raghav, Mitraz, Talwiinder, MC Square and NDS. The first single titled "Laal Peeli Akhiyaan", an adaptation of a Rajasthani song of the same name, was released on 12 January 2024. The second single, a remake of "Gulaab" by Mitraz, "Akhiyaan Gulaab" was released on 24 January 2024.
The song "Teri Baaton Mein Aisa Uljha Jiya (Title Track)" was a remake of the song "Teri Baaton (Your Words)" from the 2004 album Storyteller by the Canadian singer Raghav.
The fourth single titled "Tum Se" was released on 2 February 2024. The fifth single, a remake of "Gallan 4" by Talwiinder called "Gallan" released on 13 February 2024.

Release
Theatrical
Initially scheduled for release on 7 December 2023, Teri Baaton Mein Aisa Uljha Jiya was released on 9 February 2024, coinciding with the Valentine's Day weekend.

Home media
The film was premiered on Amazon Prime Video from 5 April 2024.

Reception
Box office
The film grossed ₹96.29 crore (US$11 million) in India and ₹37.35 crore (US$4.4 million) overseas, for a worldwide total of ₹133.64 crore (US$16 million).

Critical response
Teri Baaton Mein Aisa Uljha Jiya received mixed reviews from critics. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 43% of 14 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 5.4/10. It received mixed-to-positive reviews from audiences.
Anupama Chopra, in her review for Film Companion said that "Teri Baaton Mein Aisa Uljha Jiya is a good-looking film with foreign locations, beach and shaadi songs, stylish clothes and expansive houses and offices. The surfaces are gleaming. I wish the writing had matched". In a similar take, NDTV's Saibal Chatterjee rated the film 1.5/5 and opined "Once the novelty of the notion wears off - and that happens pretty quickly - there is little on offer here barring the fact that this is the first time that Shahid Kapoor and Kriti Sanon have teamed up".
Anuj Kumar of The Hindu had a more lukewarm response to the film, reviewing "Shahid Kapoor and Kriti Sanon submit themselves to a fantastic idea that doesn't quite reach its potential, but provides moments of harmless fun as it probes the state of affairs in modern-day romance". News18's Titas Chowdhury rated the film 3/5 and praised Kapoor and Sanon's "scintillating chemistry".
A critic from Bollywood Hungama gave 2.5 out of 5 stars and wrote "Teri Baaton Mein Aisa Uljha Jiya rests on the fine performances but suffers due to the writing and an abrupt climax." The Indian Express's Shubhra Gupta rated the film 2 out of 5 stars and stated "Shahid Kapoor and Kriti Sanon deliver confused film that combines sci-fi tropes with mushy Indian family drama".

Accolades