Terminator Zero is a science fiction action anime series developed by Mattson Tomlin for Netflix. It is set in the Terminator universe created by James Cameron and Gale Anne Hurd. Animation services were provided by Production I.G under the direction of Masashi Kudō.
The eight-episode series premiered on August 29, 2024.

Premise
In 1997 Tokyo, Malcolm Lee is developing Kokoro, an AI system intended to compete with Skynet. The day before Judgment Day, Lee finds himself and his three children pursued by an unknown robot assassin and a mysterious soldier from the year 2022 has been sent to protect him.

Voice cast and characters
Main
Malcolm Lee (Voiced by: Yūya Uchida (Japanese); André Holland (English)): a scientist developing an AI that competes with Skynet
Eiko (Voiced by: Toa Yukinari (Japanese); Sonoya Mizuno (English)): a resistance soldier sent from the year 2022 to protect Malcolm and his three kids from the Terminator and to prevent the Kokoro AI from being launched
Misaki (Voiced by: Saori Hayami (Japanese); Sumalee Montano (English)): Malcolm's housekeeper and the sweet and protective babysitter of Malcolm's kids
Kenta Lee (Voiced by: Hiro Shimono (Japanese); Armani Jackson (English)): Malcolm's elder son
Reika Lee (Voiced by: Miyuki Sato (Japanese); Gideon Adlon (English)): Malcolm's daughter
Hiro Lee (Voiced by: Shizuka Ishigami (Japanese); Carter Rockwood (English)): Malcolm's younger son
Kokoro (Voiced by: Atsumi Tanezaki (Japanese); Rosario Dawson (English)): an AI developed by Malcolm Lee, created to counter Skynet
The Terminator (Voiced by: Yasuhiro Mamiya (Japanese); Timothy Olyphant (English)): a cybernetic assassin sent back in time to eliminate Malcolm Lee

Supporting
The Prophet (Voiced by: Mari Yokoo (Japanese); Ann Dowd (English)): the Resistance's spiritual and philosophical leader
Ani / Annie (Voiced by: Ayaka Shimoyamada (Japanese); Julie Nathanson (English)): Eiko's fellow resistance soldier and roommate during the year 2022
Natsuko (Voiced by: Yuka Keicho (Japanese); Vanessa Marshall (English)): a scientist working under Malcolm
Fujino (Voiced by: Chō (Japanese); Fred Tatasciore (English)): a senior police detective
Shiraki (Voiced by: Yōhei Azakami (Japanese); Nicolas Roye (English)): a young police detective and Fujino's partner

Episodes
Production
An anime series set in the Terminator universe was first announced in February 2021. The anime was produced for Netflix by animation studio Production I.G and Skydance Television, coming from showrunner Mattson Tomlin and director Masashi Kudō. The show further developed with the working title Terminator: The Anime Series as revealed by Netflix in its 2023 Geeked Week when it announced the premise of following new characters in the year 1997.
The scripts were originally written in English by Tomlin, then translated to Japanese, which was the language used for the animation. The dialogue was then rewritten by Tomlin to fit the animation in Japanese for the English dub.
Tomlin has stated that the series treats all of the prior films as canon, and Production I.G. requested that it have some kind of Japanese component. The decision was made to set the story in Japan, which introduces cultural differences, such as lesser availability of firearms to civilians. Tomlin has also stated that he wants the series to last for five seasons, mentioning that future seasons would focus on Malcolm's children as "they grow up through this war that eventually evolves into the future war" and how their views on humans and machines change and become "radically different from each other".

Casting
By June 2024, Timothy Olyphant was cast to voice the Terminator for the series, and additional character photos were first revealed with the voices of Rosario Dawson, André Holland, Sonoya Mizuno, and Ann Dowd.

Release
On August 6, 2024, all eight episodes of the series were leaked online before its official release. On August 29, 2024, the series was released on Netflix, coinciding with the in-universe date of Judgment Day.

Reception
Critical response
The series received positive reviews from critics. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 87% of 30 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 7.3/10. The website's consensus reads: "Shedding the skin of past Terminator incarnations to tell a sophisticated sci-fi saga of its own, this visceral anime proves its mettle." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 69 out of 100, based on 11 critics, indicating "generally favorable" reviews.