The Finals, stylized as THE FINALS, is a free-to-play dynamism-focused first-person shooter developed and published by Embark Studios. The game focuses on team-based matches on maps with a completely destructible environment, where players (who are divided into a number of distinct classes) are encouraged to use the dynamic environment to their advantage.

Gameplay

The Finals revolves around players competing in a fictional VR combat game show set in the year 2100. This is reflected in the holographic crowds which are seen during gameplay, as well as the commentary provided by the game in the form of The Finals' two hosts making observations about the status of a given team or the game itself. Developer Embark Studios has stated that the game is partly inspired by The Hunger Games, The Running Man (1982) and Gladiator (2000).

Most game modes feature 2, 3, or 4 teams, each competing against one another in a free-for-all competition. Players pick between the Light, Medium, or Heavy class, with their character model changing to reflect that. Each build has access to a unique arsenal of specializations, weapons, and gadgets. They also each have a different movement speed, health bar and size. Light contestants are the smallest, with fast speed and high burst damage, but the lowest health. Medium builds are a traditional soldier class, with moderate speed, size, and health. Heavy builds are the largest, with the most survivability and health, but the slowest movement speed.

Each class has unique gadgets and specializations in addition to universally available gadgets, allowing players to design a set of equipment that suits their playstyle. The Light build is given specializations related to stealth and movement: the Cloaking Device, Evasive Dash, or the Grappling Hook. The gadgets unique to the Light build also help them evade and flank enemies, including Gateways, Vanishing Bombs and Sonar Grenades, making them "glass-cannon" ambushers. The Medium build features many deployables and equipment that provide general utility. This includes the Healing Beam, the Defibrillator, the Guardian Turret, and a Dematerializer that can create holes in terrain which can be seen through, shot through, and passed through. The Heavy build is given powerful destructive tools, such as the Sledgehammer, RPG-7, and C4, as well as defensive measures like deployable Barricades, a wide Mesh Shield, and a spherical Dome Shield.

The game mechanics encourage emergent gameplay by the way of the many free variables present. These include highly player-modifiable terrain (both destruction and limited construction), varied weather conditions and time of day (which change between matches), and additional features like moving platforms or structures suspended in the air. The arenas contain numerous items which can be picked up and thrown by the player, including but not limited to plant pots, chairs, and tables. Different types of canisters and barrels can also be found both throughout the arena, and suspended in hanging boxes. These canisters can explode to damage the environment, or create various game elements such as fires, toxic gas clouds, glitch explosions that interrupt player gadgets, etc. Entire buildings can be toppled if the correct supports are targeted, and large enough debris can destroy other buildings. The game also allows for limited construction, although this takes the form of deployable cover (like Barricades), as well as through the use of the Goo Gun, Goo Grenade and Goo Barrels, which create solid, destructible barriers that resemble foam insulation. Additionally, several game elements have interactions with each other, such as smoke extinguishing fires, fire dissipating toxic gas clouds and burning down goo, and smoke hiding toxic gas clouds.

Players who are killed are turned into team-colored statues that their teammates can carry and interact with to revive them. It takes five seconds of continuous interaction to revive a player, but Medium-class players may use a defibrillator on a statue to revive the teammate hands-free, which takes three seconds. Teammates revived by a defibrillator respawn with 50% of their maximum health, however much ammunition was in their gun at the time of death, and incur a short cooldown on their specializations and gadgets. If enough time elapses, a player may choose to respawn themselves at full health. In quick-play games, players can respawn an unlimited number of times, while in Tournament game modes, players have a limited amount of Respawn Tokens, gaining one extra token per round. If an entire team is eliminated before a member can respawn (referred to as a team wipe), all members will respawn together, at the same time, and without consuming respawn tokens. Players who die with no more respawn tokens are forced to wait until a teammate revives them, or until their team is wiped out.

At the end of matches, players earn in-game currency, known as "VR", by playing matches. These can be spent to permanently unlock new weapons, specializations, and gadgets, with most items costing 500 VRs to purchase, and items released in the current season costing 2200 VRs to purchase. The maximum holding limit for VRs is 5000, and exceeded VRs will not be returned.

As of Season 8, released on September 10, 2025, new players are now presented with a variety of preset loadouts called "Playstyles". Each Playstyle contains a specialization, weapon and three gadgets, in addition to a variety of reserve items immediately unlocked upon starting the game. Further gameplay allows new players to obtain "Playstyle Tokens" that can unlock extra playstyles, in addition to purchasing individual items with VRs.

Game modes

As a live service game, The Finals receives new game modes and revisions to existing ones regularly. Game modes are divided into casual ("quick play") and competitive modes.

Cashout

In Cashout, four teams each with three players compete against one another to earn as much money as possible. The primary source of money are "cash boxes", that must be unlocked from a vault and transported to a "cashout station". After bringing a cash box to a station, the team that deposited it instantly earns 20% of its value, then must hold control of the station until the cashout timer expires to receive the remaining 80%. Other teams can "steal" a cashout in progress with 7 seconds of continuous interaction, claiming ownership of the station and its remaining potential payout. Two cash boxes or activated cashouts will always be in play at a given time, and a new vault spawns every time a team completes a cashout. Each vault that appears on the map is more valuable than the last, ranging anywhere from $10,000 to $22,000, enabling teams at the bottom of the scoreboard to overtake first place if they claim enough money at the very end of a round. Multiple vaults can be brought to a single cashout station, combining their payouts under one timer. Additional bonus money can be earned by killing enemy players ($500 each), starting vaults ($1000 each), and stealing cashouts ($1000 each). Players start with two respawn tokens, and gain an additional token at the end of each round.

Aspects of Cashout take inspiration from traditional capture the flag and king of the hill game types, requiring teams to obtain, hold and then defend different objectives to complete the main objective.

Rounds last 9 minutes, with the possibility of an additional 1-minute "overtime" if a vault is deposited into an empty cashout station within the last 60 seconds of the round. Players cannot change their contestant once the round starts, but they can swap items from their reserve loadout after death. However, players revived by teammates will keep their current loadout, whether or not they changed it.

In World Tour and Ranked Tournaments, Cashout is played in a tournament-style bracket with 8 teams: In the first round, teams compete against each other in groups of four, with the top two teams from each group moving to the second round. The top two teams in the second round then fight in a final round to declare the tournament winners. In the final round, the rules are modified: The first team to score two cashouts wins, regardless of kills or objectives done. During Season 2, there was also a single-round variant of Cashout.

World Tour

Debuted on June 13, 2024, with Season 3, World Tour is a competitive mode consisting of weekly rotating Cashout Tournaments with occasionally changing variations of the standard ranked rules. Players are ranked on a leaderboard based on their cash earned, while Win Points given based on tournament placement are used to progress a special World Tour badge and gain additional rewards at the end of the season. Unlike ranked mode, players cannot lose win points or cash. While World Tour features the same format as Ranked Tournaments, including four teams of three in each round, the rules are slightly more relaxed, allowing for temporary in-game events like Mega Damage and Low Gravity, and letting players swap items from their reserve loadout between respawns. At the end of the first two rounds, the two teams among the four with the lowest cash will be eliminated from the match. At the end of the final (third) round, the first team that obtains $50,000 cash out will become the winner. A different amount of win points will be granted after each match ends based on when they are eliminated from the match and whether they have a win in the final round. Contestants eliminated from the first round will get two win points, and six win points for the second round. A total of 14 win points will be earned for losing the final (third) round, and 25 points if one has won it and becomes the tournament winner.

Ranked Tournament

Ranked Tournament is a competitive mode following standard Cashout rules, except that players cannot change their loadouts after death, and may only access their reserved items between rounds. As players participate in tournaments, they increase their ranking through various leagues, ranging from Bronze to Diamond. The five-hundred highest-ranked players at the end of the season are given a special "Ruby" rank. Players earn or lose rank points depending on the combined skill of the enemy teams, the expected outcome of the match as a result, and the team's final placement when they are eliminated or win. The Finals initially featured both Ranked and Unranked Tournaments, but the Unranked variation was removed in Season 2. In Season 3, the Cashout ranked tournament was temporarily replaced with World Tour to allow the developers to experiment with balancing changes, before it would be reintroduced alongside World Tour in the next season.

Quick Cash

In this quick-play variation of the Cashout game mode, three teams of three compete against one another to earn money. The ultimate winner of the round is the first team to complete two cashouts (the cash goal is $20,000, and each cashout is worth $10,000). Kills, assists, and deaths do not count towards a team's score.

Bank It (Removed Indefinitely)

A second game mode, Bank It, focuses more on player vs. player combat and individual play. Scattered around the map are various caches filled with coins, which four teams of three compete to collect. Currency is held by players on their person, but is dropped upon their death. Additionally, any time a player is eliminated, they drop extra currency even if they held none. This currency can be turned in at temporary deposits that sometimes appear on the map, forcing teams to occasionally gather in the same place to secure their earned money. The first team to bank $40,000 in currency wins.

Solo Bank It (Temporary Gamemode)

Bank It also had a temporary "solo" gamemode, where twelve players compete individually in a free-for-all format rather than in teams.

Power Shift
Added in Season 2, the Power Shift mode is a 5v5 ‘King of the Hill’ style mode where teams fight for control of a floating platform that continuously moves throughout the map, with both teams attempting to push the platform in opposite directions. The platform follows a set path around the arena and will destroy any terrain in its way. The game will end when one team moves the platform towards their designated goal. If time runs out while the losing team has control, overtime is incurred where the leading team must gain control of the platform before the losing team can take the lead. Like other quick-play game modes, Power Shift allows players to change not only their loadout, but also their contestants throughout the match, and have full access to all weapons, specializations and gadgets. Loadout changes will take effect whenever a contestant respawns, but not when they are revived.

Terminal Attack (Removed Indefinitely)
Terminal Attack was initially a limited-time event game mode launched on May 2, 2024. This game mode was set to end on May 22, 2024. In Terminal Attack, ten players are divided into two groups of five – Attackers and Defenders. Attackers have limited time to breach insert a Decryption Key into one of two Terminals available in the arena. Meanwhile, Defenders must strategize and coordinate their defense to stop the Attackers from achieving their objective. The teams switch sides after three rounds in a best-of-7 format. In this game mode, players cannot respawn or heal themselves, and Medium characters are unable to use their Healing Beam or Defibrillator, meaning each contestant has just one life per round, only able to regenerate a small portion of their health while out of combat. Additionally, items such as grenades or traps have limited charges and are only renewed at the start of each round. The damage dealt to the arena is persistent until teams switch sides. Terminal Attack is similar to the default modes in Valorant and Counter-Strike.
On May 22, 2024, Embark announced that Terminal Attack will become a permanent game mode due to greater than expected popularity. On June 7, 2024, it was announced that in Season 3 of The Finals, Terminal Attack would replace Cashout Tournament as the main ranked mode. According to Embark, this was to give the developers time to balance Cashout without affecting the leaderboards. As of September 26, 2024, partially due to heated backlash from the fanbase, Cashout Tournament was reinstated as the main ranked gamemode, with Terminal Attack being relegated to a quick-play gamemode. As of Season 8's start on September 10, 2025, Terminal Attack has been removed from the game, and is replaced with Head-2-Head.

Team Deathmatch

Team Deathmatch debuted towards the end of Season 5, being a temporary gamemode brought into the game by the in-universe hacker group known as "CNS". Two teams of 5 fight in a best-of-3 format. In each round, teams must earn $3000 (30 eliminations, $100 per elimination) to win the round, and be the first team to win two rounds. The gamemode returned at the beginning of Season 6 as a permanent quick play gamemode to huge positive reception by fans, mimicking the previous love of the mode during its temporary addition. Some players criticize the mode for not being directly objective, but rather elimination based, yet most find the gamemode positive for the game.

Head-2-Head

Head-2-Head was a limited-time event game mode added on August 14, 2025, and lasted until September 10, 2025. The gamemode follows Tournament Cashout rules, specifically the final round of a Cashout Tournament, where two teams of three fight to earn two cashouts. Unlike the tournament modes, as a casual mode, respawn tokens are provided in unlimited quantity. During its original run, it also featured an exclusive game show event where a kaiju-style monster throws debris around the arena, destroying terrain over time. Since season 8, Head-2-Head is a permanent new addition, replacing Terminal Attack.

Point Break
Point Break, added in Season 9, follows a Attack/Defend format, having two teams of eight fight against each other. Attackers are meant to activate nine Grand Vaults, while Defenders must either prevent or deactivate them. Defenders have an infinite amount of Respawn Credits, while Attackers share a pool of them. However, Attackers can gain more Credits upon successfully destroying a Grand Vault.

Event game modes
Steal The Spotlight

Steal The Spotlight was a limited-time event game mode, which was a variant of Solo Bank It. This event lasted from January 31 until February 14, 2024. In Steal The Spotlight, contestants played as the Heavy with a pre-set loadout consisting of the Lewis Gun and SA1216 as primary weapons, a variety of gadgets, and Charge 'n Slam as their Specialization. There was also a unique set of cosmetics for this game mode which all players had equipped while in the match. By completing certain contracts within Steal The Spotlight, contestants could obtain the cosmetic items worn in the game. During the match, the gameplay was the same as regular Solo Bank It, except that the map was always Las Vegas and there were special turrets and laser sensors near all cashout stations which added a new aspect of stealthiness.

Smoking Guns

Smoking Guns was a limited-time event game mode, which was a variant of Cashout. This event originally lasted from February 29 to March 3, 2024, but was extended to March 14. In Smoking Guns, contestants choose a preset loadout for the three builds in the game that restricts one to Western-style equipment. Each Build was able to use the frag grenades, pyro grenades, and gas grenades. Light was limited to the Grappling Hook as the Specialization, The Sword, SH1900 (Sawed-Off Shotgun), and The SR-84 (Sniper Rifle) for the weapons, and Smoke Grenade and Glitch Grenade for the build-specific gadgets. Medium was restricted to the Healing Beam as the Specialization, R.357 and Model 1887 for the weapons, and the Zipline, Explosive Mines, and Goo Grenades for the build-specific gadgets. Heavy was restricted to Charge 'n Slam for the Specialization, The Lewis Gun and The Sledgehammer for the weapons, and Pyro Mine and Barricades for build-specific gadgets. There was also a specific set of cosmetics for this game mode which all players had equipped during the match. By completing certain contracts within Smoking Guns, contestants could obtain the cosmetic items worn in the game mode. During the match, the gameplay was the same as regular Cashout, except that the map was always Monaco and there were Western-style objects and decorations.

Bunny Bash

Bunny Bash was a limited-time event game mode, which was a variant of Power Shift. This event lasted from March 27 to April 10, 2024. In Bunny Bash, contestants choose a preset loadout for each of the three builds in the game. These loadouts promoted the new weapons introduced to the game at the start of Season 2, including the Famas and the KS-23. Similar to the Smoking Guns event, each Build was able to use the frag grenades, pyro grenades, and gas grenades. Light was limited to the Grappling Hook as the Specialization, and The Sword and The SR-84 (Sniper Rifle) for the weapons. Medium was restricted to the Healing Beam as the Specialization and the Famas and Model 1887 for the weapons. Heavy was restricted to Charge 'n Slam for the Specialization, and the KS-23 and The Sledgehammer for the weapons. Similar to Smoking Guns, there was also a specific set of cosmetics for this game mode in the form of Easter-themed bunny suits, which all players had equipped during the match. By completing certain contracts within Bunny Bash, contestants could obtain the cosmetic items worn in the game mode in addition to Easter-themed weapon skins. During the match, the gameplay was the same as regular Power Shift, except that the map was always SYS$HORIZON and there were Easter-style objects and decorations.

Heavy Hitters

Heavy Hitters was a limited-time event game mode that lasted from May 22 to June 12, 2025, which included a new map designed to be the interior of an "OSPUZE Tiger Juice" can, a drink created by one of the gameshow's sponsors. All contestants get a preset loadout on the Heavy class with the Charge n' Slam, and a modified Sledgehammer that swings up for its alternate attack. The goal was to knock other player's off the map with updated interactions that caused the Sledgehammer to deal significant knockback. The lower the health of a player, the further they would travel when hit, much like the game Super Smash Bros, and the goal was to earn $3000 (30 total eliminations).

Blast Off!

Blast Off! was a limited-time event game mode that lasted from July 3 to July 17, 2025. This game mode follows Deathmatch rules with some modifications: The first team to earn 35 kills, or whichever team has the most kills before the timer runs out, wins the round. Every player is locked to playing as a Medium, with no access to specializations. Additionally, every player receives the CL-40, APS Turret, Bounce Pad and RPG as gadgets. For aesthetics, the graphics and sound quality were reduced, new sound effects for weapons were added, and a different announcer was used for the game mode.

Super Cashball

Super Cashball was a limited-time event game mode that lasted from July 24 to August 7, 2025. The gamemode is an entirely new mode that pits two teams of five against each other. The objective is to claim a "Cashball" at the center of an arena, and toss it into the enemy's goal to earn points. Throwing the ball to an ally who catches it "charges" the Cashball, adding one more point to its value up to a maximum of three points. The gamemode lasts 10 minutes with a brief intermission at the 5-minute mark to allow players to regroup and change their loadouts. Players can choose from three preset loadouts, one for each class.

Heaven or Else

Heaven or Else was a limited-time event game mode that lasted from October 2 to October 16, 2025. The game mode was nearly the same as the Heavy Hitters event. Players' preset loadouts included the Heavy class with Charge n' Slam, a modified spear, jump pad, goo grenade, and healing ball. The modified spear could repel opponents with both its primary and secondary attacks. Additionally, the secondary attack spun for only one round, down from three in the normal version. The modified spear could also deal more damage to buildings, typically requiring only two or three hits to destroy a wall. The physical law was also modified - the lower HP players had, the easier it was for them to be repelled over a long distance. In exchange, players could not be eliminated by damage - only by dropping outside of the map would truly eliminate them.

Ghoul Rush

Ghoul Rush was a limited-time event game mode that lasted from October 23 to November 6, 2025. The game mode was brand new. Twelve players would enter the game as twelve solo teams, and choose from two preset loadouts as "Survivors" - Middle class and heavy class. The middle class survivor set contains Guardian Turrent as the specialization, P90 as the weapon, and Explosive Mine, Goo Gernade, and Proximity sensor as gadgets. The heavy class survivor set contains Charge 'N' Slam as the specialization, M60 as the weapon, and (Missing Gadget), (Missing Gadget) and Lockbolt as gadgets. Players will be rewarded cash for elimination and survival time as survivors, and the player with the most cash after three rounds will win the match. After players have been eliminated as "Survivors", they will turn into "Ghouls" with a completely different preset outloads. Ghouls' preset loadouts include heavy class with wrench claws and sledgehammer, and light class with evasive dash (Unable to store usage count) and dagger. Both weapons for Ghouls have no secondary attack but do have a primary attack that deals more damage to buildings

Chinese version

On June 17, 2025, IGN China posted a video primarily about the Chinese version of The Finals. In collaboration with Tencent, Embark and Nexon began localizing this game for China's cultural context. In the video, the game developers from Tencent discussed the upcoming beta test of the Chinese version, the unique features coming (including skins, events, and maps), and their determination to eliminate bugs and cheaters. Examples of the new features include character skins related to food delivery services in China, a Defibrillator skin in a pen-shaped adrenaline injection shape, and upgradable skins (for both the character and weapons) with a unique color for each upgrade using multi-bucks. The game was officially released on November 18, 2025.

Development

The Finals, along with Arc Raiders, are the first two titles from Stockholm-based Embark Studios. A producer noted that destructibility changed the way the player approached the game, saying "we're constantly surprised by the new and inventive ways players utilize the freedom the game grants. Why open a door when you can use a rocket launcher to blow a hole in the wall, right?".

The title was announced in August 2022 for PC, with console ports later unveiled for PlayStation 5 and Xbox Series X and Series S. Closed betas were run in early 2023, with the first closed beta lasting from March 7–21, 2023, and the second closed beta occurring between June 14–21. An open beta took place between October 26 until November 5.

The Finals was released on PC, Xbox Series X&S, and PlayStation 5 on December 7, 2023, during The Game Awards 2023. The Finals features full support for crossplay, allowing players on different platforms to play together. Upon release, underperforming servers caused the developers to put a temporary cap on player counts. The game was also later ported to the PlayStation 4 on December 12, 2024, however it was not ported to the Xbox One due to hardware limitations. In November 2025, the studio announced that the PS4 version will be shut down on March 18, 2026.

Despite Kernel-Level Anti-cheat imported into the game, to combat cheaters, the developers noted that they will continue to support the Steam Deck, and other SteamOS devices.

Reception

According to IGN, poor performance and low frame rates posed an issue during the game's early closed betas. This game also has problems in balance, as Justin Koreis pointed out that "balance issues are a bit of a concern at the moment" generally because "Heavies tend to be ubiquitous in competitive modes." The Finals has also been criticized for the use of the AI-based text-to-speech program created by ElevenLabs to artificially generate the voices of characters, rather than utilizing traditional voice actors. Embark Studios responded to the criticism, telling Axios the generated voicework in The Finals is "based on a mix of professional voice actors and temp voices from Embark employees."

Accolades
