Upload is an American science fiction comedy drama television series created by Greg Daniels for Amazon Prime Video. The first season premiered on May 1, 2020, and consists of ten episodes. In May 2020, the series was renewed for a second season, which premiered on March 11, 2022, and consists of seven episodes. In May 2022, the series was renewed for a third season, which premiered on October 20, 2023, and consists of eight episodes. In March 2024, the series was renewed for a fourth and final season, which premiered August 25, 2025, and consists of four episodes.

Premise

In 2033, humans can "upload" themselves into a virtual afterlife of their choosing. When computer programmer Nathan Brown dies prematurely, he is uploaded to the very expensive Lakeview, but then finds himself under the thumb of his possessive, still-living girlfriend Ingrid. As Nathan adjusts to the pros and cons of digital heaven, he bonds with Nora, his living customer service rep. Nora struggles with the pressures of her job, her dying father who does not want to be uploaded, and her growing feelings for Nathan while slowly coming to believe that Nathan was murdered.

Cast and characters

Main

Robbie Amell as Nathan Brown, a 27-year-old computer engineering grad and newly deceased computer programmer who is uploaded to the digital afterlife Lakeview.

Kauis Lowe portrays a young Nathan (guest season 1)

Andy Allo as Nora Antony, a living woman who is Nathan's handler in his afterlife
Allegra Edwards as Ingrid Kannerman, Nathan's materialistic, obsessive girlfriend
Zainab Johnson as Aleesha Morrison-Downey, Nora's coworker who is Luke's handler

Kevin Bigley as Luke Crossley, a former army corporal and Lakeview resident who befriends Nathan and is dating Mildred
Andrea Rosen as Lucy Slack (seasons 2–3; recurring season 1; guest season 4), Nora and Aleesha's domineering boss
Owen Daniels as A.I. Guy (seasons 2–4; recurring season 1), the virtual employee at Lakeview who can appear in many places at once
Daniels also portrays Boris Netherlands (season 2), an unemployed actor who was paid for his likeness to be used in Lakeview
Daniels also portrays B-HBSG (season 4), A.I. Guy's "evil" sentient replacement

Anja Savcic as A.I. Girl (recurring season 4), who was created after splitting from A.I. Guy
Josh Banday as Ivan Spelich (seasons 2–4; recurring season 1), Nora's coworker

Recurring

Jessica Tuck as Vivian "Viv" Brown (seasons 1–3; guest season 4), Nathan's mother
Chris Williams as Dave Antony (season 1; guest seasons 2, 4), Nora's father

Jordan Johnson-Hinds as Jamie Arpaz (season 1), Nathan's best friend and business partner
Megan Ferguson (pilot), Hilary Jardine (season 1), and Vic Michaelis (season 2; guest season 4) as Mildred Kannerman, Ingrid's centenarian grandmother who resides in Lakeview, and whose avatar was based on an old black and white photograph
William B. Davis as David Choak (seasons 1–3; guest season 4), a wealthy man living across the hall from Nathan
Elizabeth Bowen as Fran Booth (season 1), Nathan's awkward cousin who is investigating his car accident
Rhys Slack as Dylan (season 1; guest seasons 2–4), a child who lives in Lakeview after falling into the Grand Canyon and is trapped in the form of a 12-year-old despite being uploaded six years prior
Brea St. James portrays an Older (female) Dylan (guest season 1)

Matt Ward as Byron Titley (season 1; guest season 2), Nora's casual sex partner

Andy Thompson as Lionel Winters (seasons 1, 3–4; guest season 2) (identified only as "the Professor" in the first season)
Barclay Hope as Oliver Kannerman (seasons 1, 3–4; guest season 2), Ingrid's father
Yvetta Fisher as Batia (seasons 1–2; guest seasons 3–4), Nora's coworker

Ryan Beil as Craig Munthers (season 2; guest seasons 1, 3)

Paulo Costanzo as Matteo (season 2; guest season 3)

Mackenzie Cardwell as Tinsley (seasons 2–3; guest season 4), a temp hired by Aleesha
Kristine Cofsky as Holden (season 3; guest season 1), Nathan's ex-girlfriend

Peter James Smith as Mauricio (season 3; guest season 1), a digital afterlife salesman
Bassem Youssef as Miro Mansour (season 3)

Jeanine Mason as Karina Silva (season 3), a charming new Horizen executive in charge of new product development and cybersecurity
Dayo Ade as Babatunde (season 4)

Lee Majdoub as Jitendra Baskar (season 4)

Guest
Christine Ko as Mandy (season 1), Nora's roommate
Wayne Wilderson as Zach (season 1)
Matt Braunger as Brad (season 1)

Chloe Coleman as Nevaeh, Nathan's niece

Luvyna Ward portrays a younger Nevaeh (season 2)

Justin Stone as Dan the Orbit Gum Guy (season 1)

Julian Christopher as Ernie Lampsterman (season 1), a Horizen therapist whose avatar in Lakeview is a Labrador Retriever
Scott Patey as Josh Pitzer (season 1), an executive hoping to buy Nathan's and Jamie's software
Creed Bratton as Rupert Tilford (season 1)

Teryl Rothery as Dawn Kannerman (seasons 1–2), Ingrid's mother

Lucas Wyka as Jack Kannerman (seasons 1–2)

Alex Kliner as Nathan Greenstein (seasons 1–3)

Philip Granger as Uncle Larry (season 1), Viv's brother and Nathan's favorite uncle
Gigi Gorgeous as Jordan/Gigi Gorgeous (seasons 1, 4)

Larry Wilmore as Kamyar Whitbridge (seasons 1, 3)

Phoebe Miu as Yang

Jennifer Garner as herself (season 2)

Christine Willes as Janet Boxner (seasons 2–4)
Tom Tasse as Brian Choak (seasons 2, 4)
Hiro Kanagawa as Detective Sato (seasons 2–3)
Erin Karpluk as Magruder (season 3)
Graeme Duffy as Rory Shicklemen (season 3)
Amy McInnes as Penny Chao (season 3)
Ravi Kapoor as Dr. Kapoor (season 3)
William Gibson as himself (season 3)
Amitai Marmorstein as Dennis (season 4)
Eduard Witzke as Sasha (season 4)

Episodes
Series overview
Season 1 (2020)
Season 2 (2022)
Season 3 (2023)
Season 4 (2025)
Production
Development
On September 8, 2017, Amazon announced it had ordered a pilot for a new single-camera comedy series created by Greg Daniels. On July 28, 2018, Amazon announced it had given the production an order for a first season of ten episodes. Daniels and Howard Klein are executive producers, and the series is produced by 3 Arts Entertainment. The first season premiered on May 1, 2020.

On May 8, 2020, Amazon renewed the series for a second season, which premiered on March 11, 2022. On May 11, 2022, Amazon renewed the series for a third season, which premiered on October 20, 2023. In October 2023, Daniels mentioned in an interview with Collider that he was hopeful for a fourth season and that the writing process would begin during November 2023. On March 6, 2024, Amazon renewed the series for a fourth and final season, which premiered on August 25, 2025.

Casting

In January 2018, it was announced that Robbie Amell and Andy Allo had received the pilot's male and female lead roles.

While the series was filming its second season in February–March 2021, Paulo Costanzo and Mackenzie Cardwell were cast in recurring roles. At the release-date announcement, it was also confirmed that Amell, Allo, Allegra Edwards, Zainab Johnson and Kevin Bigley would return; and Josh Banday, who recurred in the first season, was promoted to a series regular.

Filming
The first season's principal photography took place from March 5 – May 10, 2019, in Vancouver, Canada.
Some exterior photography for the Lakeview virtual reality world was shot at Mohonk Mountain House and Preserve in New Paltz, New York, including images of the hotel, groundskeeper, and lake. A small number of interior shots, including rooms at the hotel, were also filmed on location.
The second season was filmed from January 25 – April 15, 2021.
The third season was filmed from August 15 – November 2, 2022.
The fourth season was filmed from late August to early October 2024.

Reception

Upload received positive reviews. On Rotten Tomatoes, the first season has an approval rating of 88% with an average score of 6.9 out of 10 based on reviews from 56 critics. The website's critical consensus is, "Though Upload at times suffers from tonal overload, witty writing and a winsome cast make it an afterlife worth living." On Metacritic, the season has a weighted average score of 67 out of 100, based on 22 critics, indicating "generally favorable" reviews.

The second season has an approval rating of 100% with an average score of 7.3/10 based on 15 critics on Rotten Tomatoes. The website's critical consensus is, "Upload's sophomore season goes into sleep mode just when it's revving up, but even a truncated installment of this techno afterlife makes for terrific comedy." On Metacritic, it received a weighted average score of 72 out of 100, based on 4 critics, indicating "generally favorable" reviews.

The third season has an approval rating of 88% with an average score of 7.3/10 based on 18 critics on Rotten Tomatoes. The website's critical consensus is, "Equal parts more convoluted and sophisticated than ever before, Upload's techno satire continues to take on more human dimension." On Metacritic, it received a weighted average score of 65 out of 100, based on 6 critics, indicating "generally favorable" reviews.
