VisionQuest is an upcoming American television miniseries created by Terry Matalas for the streaming service Disney+, based on the Marvel Comics character Vision. A spin-off from the miniseries WandaVision (2021), it is intended to be the 18th television series in the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU) produced by Marvel Studios, via its Marvel Television label, sharing continuity with the films of the franchise. Matalas serves as showrunner and director.
Paul Bettany reprises his role as Vision from previous MCU media, starring alongside James Spader, Todd Stashwick, Ruaridh Mollica, T'Nia Miller, Emily Hampshire, Orla Brady, Henry Lewis, Jonathan Sayer, and James D'Arcy. Development of a series centered on Vision began by October 2022, with WandaVision's Jac Schaeffer attached as head writer. She was no longer involved by May 2024, when Matalas was redeveloping the series and Bettany was confirmed to be attached. Filming began by March 2025 at Pinewood Studios in London, with Christopher J. Byrne, Gandja Monteiro, Vincenzo Natali, and Matalas directing episodes, and lasted until late July. Throughout production, casting was revealed for various other AI characters, including some returning from previous MCU projects.
VisionQuest is scheduled to debut on Disney+ in late 2026, and the series will consist of eight episodes. It will be part of Phase Six of the MCU.

Cast and characters
Paul Bettany as Vision:A superpowered android and former Avenger created using the artificial intelligences (AIs) J.A.R.V.I.S. and Ultron as well as the Mind Stone. The character was killed in the film Avengers: Infinity War (2018) and then resurrected, with an all-white appearance and no memories or emotions, in the series WandaVision (2021). After his memories were restored at the end of that series, Vision is now struggling to connect to those memories in VisionQuest. Showrunner Terry Matalas compared this journey to that of the Star Trek character Spock in the film Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home (1986). As part of his journey, Vision sees personifications of other AI programs in his mind.
James Spader as Ultron:An AI created for a peacekeeping program by Tony Stark and Bruce Banner that developed a god complex and attempted to eradicate humanity. He was seemingly destroyed by his creation, Vision, in the film Avengers: Age of Ultron (2015). Matalas said Ultron was returning in an "amazing, unique way", appearing in both robot and human forms. He said the interactions between Vision and Ultron were a "core dynamic" in the series.
Todd Stashwick as Paladin:A bounty hunter who is hunting Vision. Matalas compared Paladin to the Star Wars bounty hunter Boba Fett. Stashwick described the character as a badass and said he was similar to previous roles that Matalas had written for him.
Ruaridh Mollica as Tommy Maximoff / Speed and Thomas Shepherd:Tommy Maximoff is the speedster son of Vision and Wanda Maximoff, whose soul was placed into the teenage body of Thomas Shepherd by his twin brother Billy Maximoff in the series Agatha All Along (2024).
T'Nia Miller as Jocasta: A cunning and powerful robot driven by revenge
Emily Hampshire as E.D.I.T.H.:An AI created by Stark that runs an augmented reality security and defense system. After Stark's death in the film Avengers: Endgame (2019), control of E.D.I.T.H. was briefly bequeathed to Peter Parker / Spider-Man in the film Spider-Man: Far From Home (2019).
Orla Brady as F.R.I.D.A.Y.: An AI created by Stark to replace J.A.R.V.I.S. as his personal assistant
Henry Lewis as D.U.M.-E: A robot created by Stark to assist him in his workshop
Jonathan Sayer as U: A robot created by Stark to assist him in his workshop
James D'Arcy as J.A.R.V.I.S.: The first AI created by Stark, developed to serve as his personal assistant before being used to create Vision in Age of Ultron
Additionally, Faran Tahir reprises his role as Raza, the leader of the Ten Rings faction that kidnapped Stark in the film Iron Man (2008). Raza was seemingly killed by Obadiah Stane in that film. Also appearing are Lauren Morais as Lisa Molinari, who is closely connected to Shepherd; Diane Morgan as an associate of Paladin; and Mary McDonnell in an undisclosed role.

Episodes
The series will consist of eight episodes, with Christopher J. Byrne directing the first and second, Gandja Monteiro directing the third and fourth, and Terry Matalas directing the seventh and eighth. Vincenzo Natali also directed episodes of the series.

Production
Background
In March 2009, Marvel Studios hired writers to help come up with creative ways to launch its lesser-known properties, including Vision. Paul Bettany was cast as the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU) incarnation of the character for the film Avengers: Age of Ultron (2015). This version of the character is partially created from the artificial intelligence (AI) J.A.R.V.I.S., who was voiced by Bettany in earlier MCU films. Following Vision's death in the film Avengers: Infinity War (2018), Bettany was revealed to be portraying a reassembled and reactivated version of Vision in the Disney+ series WandaVision (2021). This version was referred to as "White Vision" or simply "The Vision", and has an all-white appearance, similar to when the comic book character was resurrected with an all-white body and no memories or emotions.
In May 2021, WandaVision head writer Jac Schaeffer signed a three-year overall television deal with Marvel Studios to develop additional Disney+ projects for the studio. By October 2022, they were developing a television series called Vision Quest, which would center on Bettany's "White Vision". Schaeffer was set as head writer after working on another WandaVision spin-off series, Agatha All Along (2024). Development of a Vision-centric series had been rumored as early as March 2021. The name "Vision Quest" was previously used for a Marvel Comics storyline in West Coast Avengers vol. 2 #42–45 (1988–89), although it was unclear if the series would be a direct adaptation of that comic. A writers' room was set to be formed in early November 2022, to include Peter Cameron, Megan McDonnell, and Eileen Shim; Cameron and McDonnell worked on WandaVision, Agatha All Along, and other MCU media. Vision Quest was expected to follow "White Vision" as he attempts to regain his memories and humanity, with potential for Elizabeth Olsen to reprise her MCU role as Vision's wife Wanda Maximoff / Scarlet Witch.

Development
By October 2023, Marvel Studios shifted its creative philosophy to a more traditional television development process, moving away from head writers and beginning to hire dedicated showrunners for its series. Schaeffer was no longer developing Vision Quest by May 2024 due to her focus on making Agatha All Along, and Terry Matalas was redeveloping the series and set as its showrunner. Marvel Studios hired Matalas after being impressed with his work on the third season of Star Trek: Picard (2023), with Marvel Studios president Kevin Feige being a particular fan of the Star Trek franchise. Matalas was also set to direct for the series, alongside Christopher J. Byrne, Vincenzo Natali, and Agatha All Along episodic director Gandja Monteiro.
Matalas met with Schaeffer upon joining the project, and Marvel Studios executive Brad Winderbaum said it would be a "love letter" to the work Schaeffer had done, while being unique to Matalas. The series was still being referred to by Marvel as Vision Quest, but The Hollywood Reporter noted that this was not its official title; Disney was referring to the series as simply Vision by May 2025, though Variety noted that an official title had yet to be announced. The title was officially announced as VisionQuest in October 2025, and the series was confirmed to be the final installment of the trilogy that began with WandaVision and continued with Agatha All Along. Marvel Studios's Mary Livanos, who worked on the first two series, returned as an executive producer, alongside Trevor Waterson and Byrne, while Roopesh Parekh was a producer. The series is being released under Marvel Studios' "Marvel Television" label.

Writing
A writers' room opened during the week of May 20, 2024, featuring Chris Monfette, Michael A. Taylor, Cindy Appel, and Matt Okumura alongside Matalas. The series is set after the events of WandaVision, and focuses on the various AIs in the MCU, many of whom appear in human form within Vision's mind as part of his attempts to re-connect with his memories. This includes the villainous AI Ultron, who Bettany said "has to be kept behind a pretty impressive firewall" inside Vision's mind. Bettany added that the other AIs appear because Vision had "been saving and copying and pasting them to keep them alive inside his head". The series continues the WandaVision trilogy theme of exploring parenthood, specifically fatherhood. Winderbaum said VisionQuest was about three generations, a grandfather, father, and son, and would explore if a man who had an abusive father could be a good father himself. Bettany added that VisionQuest explored intergenerational trauma with fathers and sons, similar to how WandaVision explored grief, as well as about "denial of pain, and denial of your own truth, and coming to terms with who and what you are, and what you could be". He also found an important aspect of Vision was that he was "always in a state of flux, [but that] he can change". Matalas said each episode of the series feels like a different kind of film, similar to how each episode of WandaVision pays homage to a different era of American sitcoms. Winderbaum said Matalas "knows the lore" of the MCU and the series would be rewarding for fans who had followed the franchise for years; Matalas described one scene in the finale as "a Marvel dream".

Casting
Bettany was confirmed to be reprising his MCU role as Vision in the series with the news of its redevelopment in May 2024. In August, James Spader was set to reprise his role as Ultron from Age of Ultron. Todd Stashwick, who previously worked with Matalas on the television series 12 Monkeys (2015–2018) and Picard, joined the cast a month later. In January 2025, Faran Tahir was revealed to be reprising his role as Raza from the first MCU film, Iron Man (2008). Ruaridh Mollica joined the cast a month later as a character referred to as "Tucker", and T'Nia Miller was cast in the leading role of the robot Jocasta in May. Soon after, star Emily Hampshire was revealed to be portraying the key role of E.D.I.T.H., an AI introduced in the MCU film Spider-Man: Far From Home (2019) where she was voiced by assistant editor Dawn Michelle King.
Matalas revealed in August 2025 that Stashwick was playing the comics character Paladin, and that Picard star Orla Brady was portraying the AI F.R.I.D.A.Y., replacing Kerry Condon who voiced the character in several MCU projects. Mary McDonnell was revealed as part of the cast the next month. In October, several more cast members were revealed: Henry Lewis and Jonathan Sayer as D.U.M.-E and U, respectively, two robots seen in the MCU films; and James D'Arcy as J.A.R.V.I.S., the AI originally voiced by Bettany in the MCU films. D'Arcy previously portrayed Edwin Jarvis, the human inspiration for the AI J.A.R.V.I.S., in several MCU projects. Additionally, Mollica was revealed to be portraying Tommy Maximoff / Speed and Thomas Shepherd, taking over from Jett Klyne who portrayed Tommy in WandaVision and the MCU film Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness (2022). In November, Lauren Morais and Diane Morgan were revealed to be respectively portraying Lisa Molinari and an associate of Paladin.

Design
Will Hughes-Jones was the production designer for the series, with Sarah Young as the costume designer after previously working as assistant costume designer on Age of Ultron.

Filming
Principal photography began by March 14, 2025, at Pinewood Studios in London, under the working title Tin Man, with Byrne, Monteiro, Natali, and Matalas directing. Christopher Ross, Ben Smithard, and Neville Kidd were the cinematographers. Location shooting took place in and around London. Filming wrapped in late July 2025, and completed in August, when Matalas indicated that production spanned seven months.

Post-production
Amelia Allwarden is editing the series after working on the Marvel Studios series Echo (2024).

Marketing
Footage from the series was included in a sizzle reel that was shown at Disney's upfront presentation in May 2025. Bettany and Winderbaum promoted the series during a Marvel Animation and Marvel Television panel at the 2025 New York Comic Con, where footage was shown. Mekishana Pierre and Nick Romano at Entertainment Weekly noted the "trippy setting" of a mansion in Vision's mind where he sees personifications of other AI programs from the MCU, comparing this to the "reality-warping vibes" of WandaVision and Agatha All Along. The appearance of Spader as Ultron in both robot and human forms was also noted by commentators.

Release
VisionQuest is scheduled to debut on Disney+ in late 2026, and will consist of eight episodes. It will be part of Phase Six of the MCU.